"Growth of agricultural land in the 21st century

Agricultural expansion describes the growth of agricultural land (arable land, pastures, etc.) in the 21st century.

The agricultural expansion is often explained as a direct consequence of the global increase in food and energy requirements due to the human overpopulation (which in turn has been attributed to agricultural expansion itself), with an estimated expectation of 10 to 11 billion humans on Earth by end of this century. It is foreseen that most of the world's non-agrarian ecosystems (terrestrial and aquatic) will be affected adversely, from habitat loss, land degradation, overexploitation, and other problems. The intensified food (and biofuel) production will in particular affect the tropical regions.

Most modern agriculture relies on intensive methods. Further expansion of the predominant farming types that rest on a small number of highly productive crops has led to a significant loss of biodiversity on a global scale already.
In the light of the already occurring and potential massive ecological effects, the need for sustainable practices is more urgent than ever.

The FAO predicts that global arable land use will continue to grow from a 1.58 billion hectares (3.9×109 acres) in 2014 to 1.66 billion hectares (4.1×109 acres) in 2050, with most of this growth projected to result from developing countries. At the same time, arable land use in developed countries is likely to continue its decline.

A well-known example of already ongoing agricultural expansion is the proliferation of palm oil production areas or the land conversion/deforestation for soy bean production in South America. Today's land grabbing activities are often a consequence of the strive for agricultural land by growing economies.

In the beginning of the 21 century the palm oil industry caused a massive deforestation in Borneo with a heavy consequences.

Contents

1 See also

2 References

3 Sources

4 External links

See also

Industrial agriculture

Green revolution

Environmental impact of agriculture

Meat consumption

Overexploitation

Biodiversity loss

Carbon sink

Deforestation

Land sparing

Species extinctions

Jevons paradox

Social and environmental impact of palm oil

References

^ "Human population numbers as a function of food supply" (PDF). Russel Hopfenburg, David Pimentel, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA;2Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA. Human population growth has typically been seen as the primary causative factor of other ecologically destructive phenomena. Current human disease epidemics are explored as a function of population size. That human population growth is itself a phenomenon with clearly identifiable ecological/biological causes has been overlooked. Here, human population growth is discussed as being subject to the same dynamic processes as the population growth of other species. Contrary to the widely held belief that food production must be increased to feed the growing population, experimental and correlational data indicate that human population growth varies as a function of food availability. By increasing food production for humans, at the expense of other species, the biologically determined effect has been, and continues to be, an increase in the human population. Understanding the relationship between food increases and population increases is proposed as a necessary first step in addressing this global problem. Resistance to this perspective is briefly discussed in terms of cultural bias in science.

^ "Morgan Freeman on the Tyranny of Agriculture". Ecorazzi.com.

^ "The expansion of modern agriculture and global biodiversity decline: an integrated assessment". Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment. 2018-02-19. Retrieved 2018-02-19.

^ "Yields and Land Use in Agriculture". Our World in Data. Retrieved 2018-02-19.

^ Ceddia, M. G.; Bardsley, N. O.; Gomez-y-Paloma, S.; Sedlacek, S. (2014-05-05). "Governance, agricultural intensification, and land sparing in tropical South America". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 111 (20): 7242–7247. doi:10.1073/pnas.1317967111. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 4034233. PMID 24799696.

^ Wright, Rebecca; Watson, Ivan; Booth, Tom; Jamaluddin, Masrur. "Borneo is burning". CNN. Retrieved 4 December 2019.

Sources

Laurance, William F.; Sayer, Jeffrey; Cassman, Kenneth G. (2014). "Agricultural expansion and its impacts on tropical nature". Trends in Ecology & Evolution. Elsevier BV. 29 (2): 107–116. doi:10.1016/j.tree.2013.12.001. ISSN 0169-5347. PMID 24388286. The human population is projected to reach 11 billion this century, with the greatest increases in tropical developing nations. This growth, in concert with rising per-capita consumption, will require large increases in food and biofuel production. How will these megatrends affect tropical terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems and biodiversity? We foresee (i) major expansion and intensification of tropical agriculture, especially in Sub-Saharan Africa and South America; (ii) continuing rapid loss and alteration of tropical old-growth forests, woodlands, and semi-arid environments; (iii) a pivotal role for new roadways in determining the spatial extent of agriculture; and (iv) intensified conflicts between food production and nature conservationCS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Tilman, D. (1999-05-25). "Global environmental impacts of agricultural expansion: The need for sustainable and efficient practices". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 96 (11): 5995–6000. doi:10.1073/pnas.96.11.5995. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 34218. PMID 10339530. The recent intensification of agriculture, and the prospects of future intensification, will have major detrimental impacts on the nonagricultural terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems of the world. The doubling of agricultural food production during the past 35 years was associated with a 6.87-fold increase in nitrogen fertilization, a 3.48-fold increase in phosphorus fertilization, a 1.68-fold increase in the amount of irrigated cropland, and a 1.1-fold increase in land in cultivation. Based on a simple linear extension of past trends, the anticipated next doubling of global food production would be associated with approximately 3-fold increases in nitrogen and phosphorus fertilization rates, a doubling of the irrigated land area, and an 18% increase in cropland.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

"Crop production and natural resource use". World Agriculture: Towards 2015/2030 - FAO. Retrieved 2018-02-19.

External links

"Agriculture and Human Population Growth". CK-12.

External video Agriculture, Population Growth, and the Challenge of Climate Change

v

t

e

Human impact on the environment

General 
Environmental issues
list of issues

Human impact
on marine life

Impact assessment

Planetary boundaries

Causes 
Agriculture
irrigation

meat production

cocoa production

palm oil

Energy industry
biofuels

biodiesel

coal

nuclear power

oil shale

petroleum

reservoirs

Genetic pollution

Industrialisation

Land use

Manufacturing
cleaning agents

concrete

plastics

nanotechnology

paint

paper

pesticides

pharmaceuticals and personal care

Marine life
fishing

fishing down the food web

marine pollution

overfishing

Mining

Overdrafting

Overexploitation

Overgrazing

Overpopulation

Particulates

Pollution

Quarrying

Reservoirs

Tourism

Transport
aviation

roads

shipping

Urbanization
urban sprawl

War

Effects 
Biodiversity threats
biodiversity loss

decline in amphibian populations

decline in insect populations

Climate change
global warming

runaway climate change

Coral reefs

Deforestation

Defaunation

Desertification

Ecocide

Erosion

Environmental degradation

Freshwater cycle

Habitat destruction

Holocene extinction

Nitrogen cycle

Land degradation

Land consumption

Land surface effects on climate

Loss of green belts

Phosphorus cycle

Ocean acidification

Ozone depletion

Resource depletion

Water degradation

Water scarcity

Mitigation 
Birth control

Cleaner production

Climate change mitigation

Climate engineering

Community resilience

Decoupling

Ecological engineering

Environmental engineering

Environmental mitigation

Industrial ecology

Mitigation banking

Organic farming

Reforestation
urban

Restoration ecology

Sustainable consumption

Waste minimization

 Commons

 Category

by country

assessment

mitigation

v

t

e

Agriculture

Agritech

Horticulture

General 
Agribusiness

Agricultural cooperative

Agricultural supplies

Agricultural science

Agricultural engineering

Agroforestry

Agronomy

Animal husbandry

Animal-free agriculture

Contract farming

Extensive farming

Farm

Free range

Intensive farming
animals

pigs

crops

Mechanised agriculture

Organic farming

Permaculture

Sustainable agriculture

Universities and colleges

Urban agriculture

History 
Prehistory
Neolithic Revolution

Agriculture in Mesoamerica

Austronesian expansion

Ancient history
Ancient Egypt

Ancient Greece

Ancient Rome

Post-classical
Arab Agricultural Revolution

Columbian exchange

Modern history
British Agricultural Revolution

Green Revolution

Organic

Monoculture

Types 
Aquaculture

Cattle

Dairy farming

Fur farming

Goat farming

Grazing
Convertible husbandry

Rotational grazing

Hydroponics

Insect farming

Livestock

Paddy field

Pig farming

Poultry farming

Orchards

Sheep farming

Terrace

Wildlife farming

Environmental impact of agriculture 
Agricultural expansion

Agricultural pollution

Agricultural wastewater

Overgrazing

Environmental impact of irrigation
Overdrafting

Climate change and agriculture

Categories 
Agriculture by country

Agriculture companies

Biotechnology

Livestock

Meat industry

Poultry farming

Agriculture and the environment

 Category

 Portal

 Wikiproject
