The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United Kingdom and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this article, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate. (April 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (April 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Area railing and steps on a terraced house in Australia

In architecture, an area (areaway in North America) is an excavated, subterranean space around the walls of a building, designed to admit light into a basement. Also called a lightwell, it often provides access to the house for tradesmen and deliveries to vaults under the pavement; it stores coal areas.

The term is most commonly applied to urban houses of the Georgian period in the UK, where it was normal for the service rooms, such as the kitchen, scullery and laundry, to be in the basement. Areas were commonly enclosed for safety reasons by wrought iron or cast iron railings, which became one of the principal decorative features of the astylar terraced houses of this period. Areas are also found in the English and French country house, where basements were popular in the 18th century as a way of accommodating service functions while allowing all four faces of a symmetrical Classical building to relate directly to its landscape setting, as at Mereworth Castle in Kent or The Abbey, Skirwith in Cumberland. Basements, and consequently areas, decreased in popularity in the 19th century, as attitudes to servants changed, although they continued to be constructed as service accommodation in urban settings where land was at a premium until the early 20th century. A suburban residential application can be seen at the Gamble House in Pasadena, California, to light the laundry and service areas of the expansive basement.

In early 18th-century house descriptions, the area was usually called the "airy", which suggests that its primary function was ventilation, needed to prevent cooking smells from percolating upstairs to the rooms above. This implies that the term "area" was a corruption of "airey" rather than vice versa.

Airey

In North London, it was known colloquially as "the airey". It is a subject of an old-time children's ball-bouncing rhyme, which begins: 

"One, two, three, alairy

My ball is down the airey

Don't forget to give it to Mary

Early in the morning".

See also

 Look up area, airy, or airey in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Atrium

Clerestory

Skylight

Light tube

Ventilation shaft

Daylighting

References

^ D. Cruickshank and N. Burton, Life in the Georgian city, 1990, pp.52-53, 83-85

Charles Dickens, Oliver Twist 1850, pp. 45/2
