"For the Spanish wine grape, see Baladi (grape).

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Baladi" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (December 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

 This article is part of a series on

Life in Egypt

Culture

Architecture
Egyptian revival

Art
Contemporary

Cinema

Cuisine

Dance
Belly dance

Raqs sharqi

Baladi

Tahtib

Tanoura

Fashion

History

Holidays

Language

Literature

Music

Mythology

Radio

Sculpture

Sport

Symbols
Flag

Anthem

Television

Society

People

Identity

Education

Demographics

Health

Media

Human rights

Religion

Wildlife

World Heritage Sites

Politics

Presidency

Government

Parliament

Political parties

Military

Corruption

Law enforcement

Foreign relations

Law

Economy

Energy

Tourism

Telecommunications

Transportation

Egypt portal

v

t

e

Baladi (Arabic: بلدي‎ baladī; relative-adjective "of town", "local", "rural", comparable to English "folk", with a lower-class connotation) can refer to an Egyptian musical style, the folk style of Egyptian bellydance (Raqs Baladi), or the Masmoudi Sogheir rhythm, which is frequently used in baladi music. It is also sometimes spelled in English as 'beledi' or 'baladee'.

In Egypt, the term baladi does not only apply to local music and dance, and can also apply to many other things that are considered native, rural, rustic or traditional, for example 'baladi bread' or 'Aish Baladi". It is also applied to kinds of food and mostly to fruits and vegetables coming from rural villages.

Contents

1 Baladi music and dance

1.1 Baladi Improvisation

1.2 Raqs baladi

1.3 'Baladi' rhythm

2 Baladi foods

3 See also

4 References

5 External links

Baladi music and dance

Baladi means “of the country” and is a style of Egyptian folk dance from the early 20th century which is still very popular. Thus, ‘Egyptian Beledi’ means ‘of the country of Egypt’. It came about when farmers moved to the city and began dancing in small spaces. Egyptians have Baladi people, Baladi bread, Baladi rhythms, Baladi music and Baladi dance.

Baladi can take the form of traditional songs, often with a verse-chorus structure - some popular examples include 'That il Shibbak' and 'Hassan ya Koulli'. There is also an improvised musical form in the baladi style.

Baladi Improvisation

This is a structured form of musical improvisation, most usually between a tabla player and an accordionist or saxophonist (although occasionally the ney may be the primary instrument). It is sometimes referred to as a baladi taqsim, ashra baladi, or a baladi progression.

A baladi taqsim consists of a number of distinct sections. Each section has a traditional structure, and the ordering of the sections follows a loose pattern, although this is not always followed. The musicians will not generally include all of the possible sections, but will choose some of them to build a structure for the piece.

Most baladi improvisations will begin with an instrumental solo (taqsim) by the primary instrument. Following this, there is usually a call and response between the instrument and the drummer, flowing into a slow rhythmic section. Further call and response sections and quicker rhythmic sections may follow. The middle part of the piece may include melodies from popular songs, or a section in the Saidi style. The final section is normally the 'tet', which has a quick tempo, and staccato accents on the off-beat.

Raqs baladi

Raqs baladi is the folk/social form of bellydance. It is more stationary than raqs sharqi, with little use of the arms, and the focus is on hip movements. Baladi dance has a 'heavy' feeling, with the dancer appearing relaxed and strongly connected to the ground. It is performed to baladi or folk music.

Typical costuming for performances of this dance style is a long dress covering the midriff, which may be plain and traditional, or heavily embellished. Traditionally, a baladi dress would resemble a theatrical version of traditional Egyptian clothing. The most common version has a straight skirt with side slits, long sleeves which may be slit to the elbows, and a scooped or shirt-style neckline. Striped fabrics or tulle bi-telli are popular. A sash may be worn around the hips, and a headscarf is often also worn. A baladi-style performance may include the use of sagat, or the dancer may perform with a cane (assaya).

Fifi Abdou, one of the legends of 20th-century Egyptian bellydance, is often described as a baladi-style dancer.

'Baladi' rhythm

In the West, the Masmoudi Sogheir ('small Masmoudi') rhythm in Arabic music is often referred to as 'baladi', because it is commonly used in baladi music. This is somewhat misleading, as there are several other rhythms commonly found in the baladi style (including Maqsoum, Saiidi and Fellahi), and this rhythm is also found in other musical styles.

The basic structure of this rhythm, played on the darbuka, is as follows:

1 & 2 & 3 & 4 &
D-D---T-D---T--

Capitals represent stressed beats. Dum (D) is the dominant hand on the middle of the drum, Tek (T) either the dominant or the non-dominant hand on the rim of the drum. Ka (k) is usually the non-dominant hand on the rim of the drum.

The drummer has freedom to “fill” in between these stressed beats as he/she sees fit to interpret the music. A common fill is:

1 & 2 & 3 & 4 &
D D tkT D tkT\t
D D tkT D tkT tk

Here, the second version has a "bridge" to lead it into the next bar.

Baladi foods

In some Middle Eastern countries, in the markets, some fruits and vegetables are sold and announced as "baladi" products, i.e. native, natural, fresh, un-cultivated and un-engineered. Eish baladi or aish baladi is a rustic Egyptian flatbread similar to pita.

See also

Egyptian music

Belly dance

Music of Egypt

Rhythm in Arabic music

References

^ Egyptian Baladi

^ Aish Baladi - Egyptian Flatbread, EatLikeAnEgyptian

^ "Overview of Belly Dance: Egyptian Folkloric style belly dancing". www.atlantabellydance.com. Retrieved 2017-12-27.

^ "Learn Bellydance Styles: Egyptian Baladi - Bellydance U". Bellydance U. 2015-08-01. Retrieved 2017-12-27.

^ Elliot, Shira Julie. Baladi" by Hossam Ramzy". www.shira.net. Retrieved 2017-12-27.

External links

Middle Eastern Rhythms
