"\"Spinoza\" redirects here. For other uses, see Spinoza (disambiguation).

17th century philosopher

Baruch Spinoza

Born Baruch Espinosa

(1632-11-24)24 November 1632

Amsterdam, Dutch Republic

Died 21 February 1677(1677-02-21) (aged 44)

The Hague, Dutch Republic

Other names Benedictus de Spinoza

Education Talmud Torah of Amsterdam

(withdrew)

University of Leiden

(no degree)

Residence

Dutch Republic

Era 17th-century philosophy

Age of Enlightenment

Region Western philosophy

School Rationalism

Spinozism

Cartesianism

Foundationalism (according to Hegel)

Conceptualism

Direct realism

Correspondence theory of truth

Main interests

Ethics, epistemology, metaphysics, Hebrew Bible

Notable ideas

List

Spinoza's philosophical system

Spinozism

Spinozistic ethics

Spinoza's theory of the emotions

Spinoza's conception of freedom

Spinoza's conception of true religion

Immanence

Conatus

Multitude

Sub specie aeternitatis

Causa sui

Deus sive Natura (\"God or Nature\")

Pantheism

Determinism

Neutral monism

Psychophysical parallelism

Criticism of Mosaic authorship of some books of the Hebrew Bible

Political society as derived from power (not contract)

Affect

Natura naturans–natura naturata

Secularism

Influences

Descartes, Stoics, Maimonides, Crescas, Abraham ibn Ezra, Avicenna, Averroes, Aristotle, Democritus, Lucretius, Epicurus, Niccolo Machiavelli, Thomas Hobbes, Giordano Bruno, Franciscus van den Enden, Menasseh Ben Israel

Influenced

Enlightenment philosophy (Age of Reason), Schopenhauer, Borges, Hegel, Rousseau, Schelling, Næss, Marx, G. Wagner, Davidson, Deleuze, Einstein, G. Eliot, Fichte, Herder, Novalis, Leibniz, Goethe, Renouvier, Nietzsche, Russell, Wittgenstein, Freud, Unamuno, Althusser, Balibar, Hardt, Ilyenkov, Negri, Santayana, Coleridge, Gotthold Ephraim Lessing, L. Strauss, Kołakowski, Yalom, Vygotsky

Signature

Baruch (de) Spinoza (/bəˈruːk spɪˈnoʊzə/; Dutch: ; Portuguese: ; born Baruch Espinosa; later as an author and a correspondent Benedictus de Spinoza, anglicized to Benedict de Spinoza; 24 November 1632 – 21 February 1677) was a Dutch philosopher of Portuguese Sephardi origin. One of the early thinkers of the Enlightenment and modern biblical criticism, including modern conceptions of the self and the universe, he came to be considered one of the great rationalists of 17th-century philosophy. Inspired by the groundbreaking ideas of René Descartes, Spinoza became a leading philosophical figure of the Dutch Golden Age. Spinoza's given name, which means \"Blessed\", varies among different languages. In Hebrew, it is written ברוך שפינוזה. In the Netherlands he used the name Bento. In his Latin and Dutch works, he used Latin: Benedictus de Spinoza.

Spinoza was raised in the Portuguese-Jewish community in Amsterdam. He developed highly controversial ideas regarding the authenticity of the Hebrew Bible and the nature of the Divine. Jewish religious authorities issued a herem (חרם) against him, causing him to be effectively expelled and shunned by Jewish society at age 23, including by his own family. His books were later added to the Catholic Church's Index of Forbidden Books. He was frequently called an \"atheist\" by contemporaries, although nowhere in his work does Spinoza argue against the existence of God.

Spinoza lived an outwardly simple life as an optical lens grinder, collaborating on microscope and telescope lens designs with Constantijn and Christiaan Huygens. He turned down rewards and honours throughout his life, including prestigious teaching positions. He died at the age of 44 in 1677 from a lung illness, perhaps tuberculosis or silicosis exacerbated by the inhalation of fine glass dust while grinding lenses. He is buried in the Christian churchyard of Nieuwe Kerk in The Hague.

Spinoza's magnum opus, the Ethics, was published posthumously in the year of his death. The work opposed Descartes' philosophy of mind–body dualism and earned Spinoza recognition as one of Western philosophy's most important thinkers. In it, \"Spinoza wrote the last indisputable Latin masterpiece, and one in which the refined conceptions of medieval philosophy are finally turned against themselves and destroyed entirely\". Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel said, \"The fact is that Spinoza is made a testing-point in modern philosophy, so that it may really be said: You are either a Spinozist or not a philosopher at all.\" His philosophical accomplishments and moral character prompted Gilles Deleuze to name him \"the 'prince' of philosophers.\"

Contents

1 Biography

1.1 Family and community origins

1.2 17th-century Netherlands

1.3 Early life

1.4 Expulsion from the Jewish community

1.5 Later life and career

1.6 Voorburg

1.7 Lens-grinding and optics

1.8 The Hague

1.9 Writings and correspondence

2 Philosophy

2.1 Substance, attributes, and modes

2.2 Ethical philosophy

2.3 Spinoza's Ethics

3 History of reception

3.1 Pantheist, panentheist, or atheist?

3.2 Comparison to Eastern philosophies

3.3 Spinoza's reception in the 19th and 20th centuries

3.4 Spinoza's religious criticism and its effect on the philosophy of language

3.5 Spinoza in literature, art, and popular culture

3.5.1 Chronological list

4 Bibliography

5 See also

6 Notes

7 References

8 Further reading

9 External links

Biography

Family and community origins

Statue (2008) of Spinoza by Nicolas Dings, Amsterdam, Zwanenburgwal with inscription \"The objective of the state is freedom\" (translation, quote from Tractatus Theologico-Politicus 1677).

Spinoza's ancestors were of Sephardic Jewish descent and were a part of the community of Portuguese Jews that had settled in the city of Amsterdam in the wake of the Portuguese Inquisition (1536), which had resulted in forced conversions and expulsions from the Iberian Peninsula. Attracted by the Decree of Toleration issued in 1579 by the Union of Utrecht, Portuguese converts to Catholicism first sailed to Amsterdam in 1593 and promptly reconverted to Judaism. In 1598, permission was granted to build a synagogue, and in 1615 an ordinance for the admission and government of the Jews was passed. As a community of exiles, the Portuguese Jews of Amsterdam were highly proud of their identity.

Although the Portuguese name \"de Espinosa\" or \"Espinosa,\" then spelled with a \"z,\" can be confused with the Spanish \"de Espinoza\" or \"Espinoza,\" there is no evidence in Spinoza's genealogy that his family came from Espinosa de los Monteros, near Burgos, or from Espinosa de Cerrato, near Palencia, both in Northern Castile, Spain. Still, this was a common Portuguese conversos family name.

Spinoza's father was born roughly a century after the forced conversions in the small Portuguese city of Vidigueira, near Beja in Alentejo. When Spinoza's father Miguel (Michael) was still a child, Spinoza's grandfather, Isaac de Spinoza, who was from Lisbon, took his family to Nantes in France. They were expelled in 1615 and moved to Rotterdam, where Isaac died in 1627. Spinoza's father and his uncle Manuel then moved to Amsterdam where they resumed the practice of Judaism. Miguel was a successful merchant and became a warden of the synagogue and of the Amsterdam Jewish school. He buried three wives and three of his six children died before reaching adulthood.

17th-century Netherlands

Amsterdam and Rotterdam operated as important cosmopolitan centres where merchant ships from many parts of the world brought people of various customs and beliefs. This flourishing commercial activity encouraged a culture relatively tolerant of the play of new ideas, to a considerable degree sheltered from the censorious hand of ecclesiastical authority (though those considered to have gone \"too far\" might have been persecuted even in the Netherlands). Not by chance were the philosophical works of both Descartes and Spinoza developed in the cultural and intellectual background of the Dutch Republic in the 17th century. Spinoza may have had access to a circle of friends who were unconventional in terms of social tradition, including members of the Collegiants. One of the people he knew was Niels Stensen, a brilliant Danish student in Leiden; others included Albert Burgh, with whom Spinoza is known to have corresponded.

Early life

Map by Balthasar Florisz van Berckenrode (1625) with the present location of the Moses and Aaron Church in white, but also the spot where Spinoza grew up.

Spinoza lived where the Moses and Aaron Church is located now, and there is strong evidence that he may have been born there.

Baruch Espinosa was born on 24 November 1632 in the Jodenbuurt in Amsterdam, Netherlands. He was the second son of Miguel de Espinoza, a successful, although not wealthy, Portuguese Sephardic Jewish merchant in Amsterdam. His mother, Ana Débora, Miguel's second wife, died when Baruch was only six years old. Spinoza's mother tongue was Portuguese, although he also knew Hebrew, Spanish, Dutch, perhaps French, and later Latin. Although he wrote in Latin, Spinoza learned the language only late in his youth.

Spinoza had a traditional Jewish upbringing, attending the Keter Torah yeshiva of the Amsterdam Talmud Torah congregation headed by the learned and traditional senior Rabbi Saul Levi Morteira. His teachers also included the less traditional Rabbi Manasseh ben Israel, \"a man of wide learning and secular interests, a friend of Vossius, Grotius, and Rembrandt\". While presumably a star pupil, and perhaps considered as a potential rabbi, Spinoza never reached the advanced study of the Torah in the upper levels of the curriculum. Instead, at the age of 17, after the death of his elder brother, Isaac, he cut short his formal studies in order to begin working in the family importing business.

The precise date of Spinoza's first studies of Latin with Francis van den Enden (Franciscus van den Enden) is not known. Some state it began as early as 1654–1655, when Spinoza was 20; others note that the documentary record only attests to his presence in van den Enden's circle around 1657–1658. Van den Enden was a notorious free thinker, former Jesuit, and radical democrat who likely introduced Spinoza to scholastic and modern philosophy, including that of Descartes. (A decade later, in the early 1660s, Van den Enden was considered to be a Cartesian and atheist, and his books were put on the Catholic Index of Banned Books.)

Spinoza's father, Miguel, died in 1654 when Spinoza was 21. He duly recited Kaddish, the Jewish prayer of mourning, for eleven months as required by Jewish law. When his sister Rebekah disputed his inheritance seeking it for herself, on principle he sued her to seek a court judgment, he won the case, but then renounced claim to the court’s judgment in his favour and assigned his inheritance to her.

Spinoza adopted the Latin name Benedictus de Spinoza, began boarding with Van den Enden, and began teaching in his school. Following an anecdote in an early biography by Johannes Colerus , he is said to have fallen in love with his teacher's daughter, Clara, but she rejected him for a richer student. (This story has been discounted on the basis that Clara Maria van den Enden was born in 1643 and would have been no more than about 13 years old when Spinoza left Amsterdam. In 1671 she married Dirck Kerckring.)

During this period Spinoza also became acquainted with the Collegiants, an anti-clerical sect of Remonstrants with tendencies towards rationalism, and with the Mennonites who had existed for a century but were close to the Remonstrants. Many of his friends belonged to dissident Christian groups which met regularly as discussion groups and which typically rejected the authority of established churches as well as traditional dogmas.

Spinoza's break with the prevailing dogmas of Judaism, and particularly the insistence on non-Mosaic authorship of the Pentateuch, was not sudden; rather, it appears to have been the result of a lengthy internal struggle: \"If anyone thinks my criticism  is of too sweeping a nature and lacking sufficient foundation, I would ask him to undertake to show us in these narratives a definite plan such as might legitimately be imitated by historians in their chronicles... If he succeeds, I shall at once admit defeat, and he will be my mighty Apollo. For I confess that all my efforts over a long period have resulted in no such discovery. Indeed, I may add that I write nothing here that is not the fruit of lengthy reflection; and although I have been educated from boyhood in the accepted beliefs concerning Scripture, I have felt bound in the end to embrace the views I here express.\"

Nevertheless, once branded as a heretic, Spinoza's clashes with authority became more pronounced. For example, questioned by two members of his synagogue, Spinoza apparently responded that God has a body and nothing in scripture says otherwise. He was later attacked on the steps of the synagogue by a knife-wielding assailant shouting \"Heretic!\" He was apparently quite shaken by this attack and for years kept (and wore) his torn cloak, unmended, as a souvenir.

After his father's death in 1654, Spinoza and his younger brother Gabriel (Abraham) ran the family importing business. The business ran into serious financial difficulties, however, perhaps as a result of the First Anglo-Dutch War. In March 1656, Spinoza filed suit with the Amsterdam municipal authorities to be declared an orphan in order to escape his father's business debts and so that he could inherit his mother's estate (which at first was incorporated into his father's estate) without it being subject to his father's creditors. In addition, after having made substantial contributions to the Talmud Torah synagogue in 1654 and 1655, he reduced his December 1655 contribution and his March 1656 pledge to nominal amounts (and the March 1656 pledge was never paid).

Spinoza was eventually able to relinquish responsibility for the business and its debts to his younger brother, Gabriel, and devote himself chiefly to the study of philosophy, especially the system expounded by Descartes, and to optics.

Expulsion from the Jewish community

Ban in Portuguese of Baruch Spinoza by his Portuguese Jewish synagogue community of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 6 Av 5416 (27 July 1656).

\"Baruch Espinosa\", son of Michael Espinosa was erased from the list of pupils of the school Ets Haim, Amsterdam, 17th century. His brother \"Ishac\" is registered just above.

On 27 July 1656, the Talmud Torah congregation of Amsterdam issued a writ of cherem (Hebrew: חרם, a kind of ban, shunning, ostracism, expulsion, or excommunication) against the 23-year-old Spinoza. The following document translates the official record of the censure:

The Lords of the ma'amad, having long known of the evil opinions and acts of Baruch de Espinoza, have endeavoured by various means and promises, to turn him from his evil ways. But having failed to make him mend his wicked ways, and, on the contrary, daily receiving more and more serious information about the abominable heresies which he practised and taught and about his monstrous deeds, and having for this numerous trustworthy witnesses who have deposed and borne witness to this effect in the presence of the said Espinoza, they became convinced of the truth of the matter; and after all of this has been investigated in the presence of the honourable chachamin , they have decided, with their consent, that the said Espinoza should be excommunicated and expelled from the people of Israel. By the decree of the angels, and by the command of the holy men, we excommunicate, expel, curse and damn Baruch de Espinoza, with the consent of God, Blessed be He, and with the consent of all the Holy Congregation, in front of these holy Scrolls with the six-hundred-and-thirteen precepts which are written therein, with the excommunication with which Joshua banned Jericho, with the curse with which Elisha cursed the boys and with all the curses which are written in the Book of the Law. Cursed be he by day and cursed be he by night; cursed be he when he lies down, and cursed be he when he rises up; cursed be he when he goes out, and cursed be he when he comes in. The Lord will not spare him; the anger and wrath of the Lord will rage against this man, and bring upon him all the curses which are written in this book, and the Lord will blot out his name from under heaven, and the Lord will separate him to his injury from all the tribes of Israel with all the curses of the covenant, which are written in the Book of the Law. But you who cleave unto the Lord God are all alive this day. We order that no one should communicate with him orally or in writing, or show him any favour, or stay with him under the same roof, or within four ells of him, or read anything composed or written by him.

Statue of Spinoza, near his house on the Paviljoensgracht in The Hague by Frédéric Hexamer.

The Talmud Torah congregation issued censure routinely, on matters great and small, so such an edict was not unusual. The language of Spinoza's censure is unusually harsh, however, and does not appear in any other censure known to have been issued by the Portuguese Jewish community in Amsterdam. The exact reason (\"horrendas heregias\", abominable heresies) for expelling Spinoza is not stated. The censure refers only to the \"abominable heresies that he practised and taught,\" to his \"monstrous deeds,\" and to the testimony of witnesses \"in the presence of the said Espinoza.\" There is no record of such testimony, but there appear to have been several likely reasons for the issuance of the censure.

First, there were Spinoza's radical theological views that he was apparently expressing in public. As philosopher and Spinoza biographer Steven Nadler puts it: \"No doubt he was giving utterance to just those ideas that would soon appear in his philosophical treatises. In those works, Spinoza denies the immortality of the soul; strongly rejects the notion of a providential God—the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and claims that the Law was neither literally given by God nor any longer binding on Jews. Can there be any mystery as to why one of history's boldest and most radical thinkers was sanctioned by an orthodox Jewish community?\"

Second, the Amsterdam Jewish community was largely composed of former \"conversos\" who had fled from the Portuguese Inquisition within the previous century, with their children and grandchildren. This community must have been concerned to protect its reputation from any association with Spinoza lest his controversial views provide the basis for their own possible persecution or expulsion. There is little evidence that the Amsterdam municipal authorities were directly involved in Spinoza's censure itself. But \"in 1619, the town council expressly ordered  to regulate their conduct and ensure that the members of the community kept to a strict observance of Jewish law.\" Other evidence makes it clear that the danger of upsetting the civil authorities was never far from mind, such as bans adopted by the synagogue on public wedding or funeral processions and on discussing religious matters with Christians, lest such activity might \"disturb the liberty we enjoy.\" Thus, the issuance of Spinoza's censure was almost certainly, in part, an exercise in self-censorship by the Portuguese Jewish community in Amsterdam.

Third, it appears likely that Spinoza had already taken the initiative to separate himself from the Talmud Torah congregation and was vocally expressing his hostility to Judaism itself. He had probably stopped attending services at the synagogue, either after the lawsuit with his sister or after the knife attack on its steps. He might already have been voicing the view expressed later in his Theological-Political Treatise that the civil authorities should suppress Judaism as harmful to the Jews themselves. Either for financial or other reasons, he had in any case effectively stopped contributing to the synagogue by March 1656. He had also committed the \"monstrous deed,\" contrary to the regulations of the synagogue and the views of some rabbinical authorities (including Maimonides), of filing suit in a civil court rather than with the synagogue authorities—to renounce his father's heritage, no less. Upon being notified of the issuance of the censure, he is reported to have said: \"Very well; this does not force me to do anything that I would not have done of my own accord, had I not been afraid of a scandal.\" Thus, unlike most of the censure issued routinely by the Amsterdam congregation to discipline its members, the censure issued against Spinoza did not lead to repentance and so was never withdrawn.

After the censure, Spinoza is said to have addressed an \"Apology\" (defence), written in Spanish, to the elders of the synagogue, \"in which he defended his views as orthodox, and condemned the rabbis for accusing him of 'horrible practices and other enormities' merely because he had neglected ceremonial observances.\" This \"Apology\" does not survive, but some of its contents may later have been included in his Theological-Political Treatise. For example, he cited a series of cryptic statements by medieval Biblical commentator Abraham ibn Ezra intimating that some apparently anachronistic passages of the Pentateuch (i.e., \"he Canaanite was then in the land,\" Genesis 12:6, which ibn Ezra called a \"mystery\" and exhorted those \"who understand it  keep silent\") were not of Mosaic authorship as proof that his own views had valid historical precedent.

The most remarkable aspect of the censure may be not so much its issuance, or even Spinoza's refusal to submit, but the fact that Spinoza's expulsion from the Jewish community did not lead to his conversion to Christianity. Spinoza kept the Latin (and so implicitly Christian) name Benedict de Spinoza, maintained a close association with the Collegiants (a Christian sect of Remonstrants) and Quakers, even moved to a town near the Collegiants' headquarters, and was buried in a Christian Protestant graveyard—but there is no evidence or suggestion that he ever accepted baptism or participated in a Christian mass or Quaker meeting. Hava Tirosh-Samuelson explains \"For Spinoza truth is not a property of Scripture, as Jewish philosophers since Philo had maintained, but a characteristic of the method of interpreting Scripture.\" Thus, by default, Baruch de Espinoza became the first secular Jew of modern Europe.

In September 2012, the Portugees-Israëlietische Gemeente te Amsterdam asked the chief rabbi of their community, Haham Pinchas Toledano, to reconsider the cherem after consulting several Spinoza experts. However he declined to remove it, citing Spinoza's \"preposterous ideas, where he was tearing apart the very fundamentals of our religion\".

Later life and career

Spinoza's house in Rijnsburg from 1661 to 1663, now a museum

Study room of Spinoza

Spinoza spent his remaining 21 years writing and studying as a private scholar.

Spinoza believed in a \"Philosophy of tolerance and benevolence\" and actually lived the life which he preached. He was criticized and ridiculed during his life and afterwards for his alleged atheism. However, even those who were against him \"had to admit he lived a saintly life\". Besides the religious controversies, nobody really had much bad to say about Spinoza other than, \"he sometimes enjoyed watching spiders chase flies\".

After the cherem, the Amsterdam municipal authorities expelled Spinoza from Amsterdam, \"responding to the appeals of the rabbis, and also of the Calvinist clergy, who had been vicariously offended by the existence of a free thinker in the synagogue\". He spent a brief time in or near the village of Ouderkerk aan de Amstel, but returned soon afterwards to Amsterdam and lived there quietly for several years, giving private philosophy lessons and grinding lenses, before leaving the city in 1660 or 1661.

During this time in Amsterdam, Spinoza wrote his Short Treatise on God, Man, and His Well-Being, which he never published in his lifetime—assuming with good reason that it might get suppressed. Two Dutch translations of it survive, discovered about 1810.\"

In 1660 or 1661, Spinoza moved from Amsterdam to Rijnsburg (near Leiden), the headquarters of the Collegiants. In Rijnsburg, he began work on his Descartes' \"Principles of Philosophy\" as well as on his masterpiece, the Ethics. In 1663, he returned briefly to Amsterdam, where he finished and published Descartes' \"Principles of Philosophy,\" the only work published in his lifetime under his own name, and then moved the same year to Voorburg.

Voorburg

In Voorburg, Spinoza continued work on the Ethics and corresponded with scientists, philosophers, and theologians throughout Europe. He also wrote and published his Theological Political Treatise in 1670, in defence of secular and constitutional government, and in support of Jan de Witt, the Grand Pensionary of the Netherlands, against the Stadtholder, the Prince of Orange. Leibniz visited Spinoza and claimed that Spinoza's life was in danger when supporters of the Prince of Orange murdered de Witt in 1672. While published anonymously, the work did not long remain so, and de Witt's enemies characterized it as \"forged in Hell by a renegade Jew and the Devil, and issued with the knowledge of Jan de Witt.\" It was condemned in 1673 by the Synod of the Reformed Church and formally banned in 1674.

Lens-grinding and optics

Spinoza earned a modest living from lens-grinding and instrument making, yet he was involved in important optical investigations of the day while living in Voorburg, through correspondence and friendships with scientist Christiaan Huygens and mathematician Johannes Hudde, including debate over microscope design with Huygens, favouring small objectives and collaborating on calculations for a prospective 40-foot (12 m) focal length telescope which would have been one of the largest in Europe at the time. He was known
for making not just lenses but also telescopes and microscopes. The quality of Spinoza's lenses was much praised by Christiaan Huygens, among others. In fact, his technique and instruments were so esteemed that Constantijn Huygens ground a \"clear and bright\" telescope lens with focal length of 42 feet (13 m) in 1687 from one of Spinoza's grinding dishes, ten years after his death. He was said by anatomist Theodor Kerckring to have produced an \"excellent\" microscope, the quality of which was the foundation of Kerckring's anatomy claims. During his time as a lens and instrument maker, he was also supported by small but regular donations from close friends.

The Hague

Spinoza House in The Hague, where the philosopher Spinoza lived from 1670 until his death in 1677.

In 1670, Spinoza moved to The Hague where he lived on a small pension from Jan de Witt and a small annuity from the brother of his dead friend, Simon de Vries. He worked on the Ethics, wrote an unfinished Hebrew grammar, began his Political Treatise, wrote two scientific essays (\"On the Rainbow\" and \"On the Calculation of Chances\"), and began a Dutch translation of the Bible (which he later destroyed).

Spinoza was offered the chair of philosophy at the University of Heidelberg, but he refused it, perhaps because of the possibility that it might in some way curb his freedom of thought.

In 1676, Spinoza met with Leibniz in The Hague for a discussion of the Ethics, his principal philosophical work which he had completed earlier that year. This meeting was described in Matthew Stewart's The Courtier and the Heretic. His health began to fail that same year, and he died on 21 February 1677 at the age of 44. His premature death was said to be due to lung illness, possibly silicosis as a result of breathing in glass dust from the lenses that he ground. Later, a shrine was made of his home in The Hague.

Burial Monument of Spinoza at the churchyard of the Nieuwe Kerk (The Hague).

Textbooks and encyclopaedias often depict Spinoza as a solitary soul who eked out a living as a lens grinder; in reality, he had many friends but kept his needs to a minimum. He preached a philosophy of tolerance and benevolence. Anthony Gottlieb described him as living \"a saintly life.\" Reviewer M. Stuart Phelps noted, \"No one has ever come nearer to the ideal life of the philosopher than Spinoza.\" Harold Bloom wrote, \"As a teacher of reality, he practised his own wisdom, and was surely one of the most exemplary human beings ever to have lived.\" According to The New York Times: \"In outward appearance he was unpretending, but not careless. His way of living was exceedingly modest and retired; often he did not leave his room for many days together. He was likewise almost incredibly frugal; his expenses sometimes amounted only to a few pence a day.\" Bloom writes of Spinoza, \"He appears to have had no sexual life.\"

Spinoza also corresponded with Peter Serrarius, a radical Protestant and millenarian merchant. Serrarius was a patron to Spinoza after Spinoza left the Jewish community and even had letters sent and received for the philosopher to and from third parties. Spinoza and Serrarius maintained their relationship until Serrarius' death in 1669. By the beginning of the 1660s, Spinoza's name became more widely known, and eventually Gottfried Leibniz and Henry Oldenburg paid him visits, as stated in Matthew Stewart's The Courtier and the Heretic. Spinoza corresponded with Oldenburg for the rest of his short life.

Writings and correspondence

The writings of René Descartes have been described as \"Spinoza's starting point.\" Spinoza's first publication was his 1663 geometric exposition of proofs using Euclid's model with definitions and axioms of Descartes' Principles of Philosophy. Spinoza has been associated with Leibniz and Descartes as \"rationalists\" in contrast to \"empiricists.\"

Spinoza engaged in correspondence from December 1664 to June 1665 with Willem van Blijenbergh, an amateur Calvinist theologian, who questioned Spinoza on the definition of evil. Later in 1665, Spinoza notified Oldenburg that he had started to work on a new book, the Theologico-Political Treatise, published in 1670. Leibniz disagreed harshly with Spinoza in his own manuscript \"Refutation of Spinoza,\" but he is also known to have met with Spinoza on at least one occasion (as mentioned above), and his own work bears some striking resemblances to specific important parts of Spinoza's philosophy (see: Monadology).

When the public reactions to the anonymously published Theologico-Political Treatise were extremely unfavourable to his brand of Cartesianism, Spinoza was compelled to abstain from publishing more of his works. Wary and independent, he wore a signet ring which he used to mark his letters and which was engraved with the word caute (Latin for \"cautiously\") underneath a rose, itself a symbol of secrecy. \"For, having chosen to write in a language that was so widely intelligible, he was compelled to hide what he had written.\"

The Ethics and all other works, apart from the Descartes' Principles of Philosophy and the Theologico-Political Treatise, were published after his death in the Opera Posthuma, edited by his friends in secrecy to avoid confiscation and destruction of manuscripts. The Ethics contains many still-unresolved obscurities and is written with a forbidding mathematical structure modelled on Euclid's geometry and has been described as a \"superbly cryptic masterwork.\"

In a letter, written in December 1675 and sent to Albert Burgh, who wanted to defend Catholicism, Spinoza clearly explained his view of both Catholicism and Islam. He stated that both religions are made \"to deceive the people and to constrain the minds of men\". He also states that Islam far surpasses Catholicism in doing so.

Philosophy

Substance, attributes, and modes

Main article: Philosophy of Baruch Spinoza

These are the fundamental concepts with which Spinoza sets forth a vision of Being, illuminated by his awareness of God. They may seem strange at first sight. To the question \"What is?\" he replies: \"Substance, its attributes, and modes\".

— Karl Jaspers

Spinoza argued that God exists and is abstract and impersonal. His view of God is what Charles Hartshorne describes as Classical Pantheism. Spinoza has also been described as an \"Epicurean materialist,\" specifically in reference to his opposition to Cartesian mind-body dualism. This view was held by Epicureans before him, as they believed that atoms with their probabilistic paths were the only substance that existed fundamentally. Spinoza, however, deviated significantly from Epicureans by adhering to strict determinism, much like the Stoics before him, in contrast to the Epicurean belief in the probabilistic path of atoms, which is more in line with contemporary thought on quantum mechanics. Spinoza's system imparted order and unity to the tradition of radical thought, offering powerful weapons for prevailing against \"received authority.\" He contended that everything that exists in Nature (i.e., everything in the Universe) is one Reality (substance) and there is only one set of rules governing the whole of the reality that surrounds us and of which we are part. Spinoza viewed God and Nature as two names for the same reality, namely a single, fundamental substance (meaning \"that which stands beneath\" rather than \"matter\") that is the basis of the universe and of which all lesser \"entities\" are actually modes or modifications, that all things are determined by Nature to exist and cause effects, and that the complex chain of cause-and-effect is understood only in part. His identification of God with nature was more fully explained in his posthumously published Ethics. Spinoza's main contention with Cartesian mind–body dualism was that, if mind and body were truly distinct, then it is not clear how they can coordinate in any manner. Humans presume themselves to have free will, he argues, which is a result of their awareness of appetites that affect their minds, while being unable to understand the reasons why they desire what they desire and act as they do.

Spinoza contends that \"Deus sive Natura\" is a being of infinitely many attributes, of which thought and extension are two. His account of the nature of reality then seems to treat the physical and mental worlds as intertwined, causally related, and deriving from the same Substance. It is important to note that, in Parts 3 through 4 of the Ethics, Spinoza describes how the human mind is affected by both mental and physical factors. He directly contests and denies dualism. The universal Substance emanates both body and mind; while they are different attributes, there is no fundamental difference between these aspects. This formulation is a historically significant solution to the mind–body problem known as neutral monism. Spinoza's system also envisages a God that does not rule over the universe by Providence, by which it can and does make changes, but a God that is the deterministic system of which everything in nature is a part. Spinoza argues that \"things could not have been produced by God in any other way or in any other order than is the case,\"; he directly challenges a transcendental God that actively responds to events in the universe. Everything that has and will happen is a part of a long chain of cause-and-effect, which, at a metaphysical level, humans are unable to change. No amount of prayer or ritual will sway God. Only knowledge of God provides the best response to the world around them.
Not only is it impossible for two infinite Substances to exist (two infinities being absurd), God as the ultimate Substance cannot be affected by anything else, or else it would be affected by something else, and not be the fundamental, all-pervasive Substance.

Spinoza was a thoroughgoing determinist who held that absolutely everything that happens occurs through the operation of necessity. For him, even human behaviour is fully determined, with freedom being our capacity to know that we are determined and to understand why we act as we do. By forming more \"adequate\" ideas about what we do and our emotions or affections, we become the adequate cause of our effects (internal or external), which entails an increase in activity (versus passivity). This process allows us to become both more free and more like God, as Spinoza argues in the Scholium to Prop. 49, Part II. However, Spinoza also held that everything must necessarily happen the way that it does.
Therefore, humans have no free will, despite strongly believing that they do. This illusionary perception of freedom stems from human consciousness, experience, and indifference to prior natural causes. Humans think they are free, but they ″dream with their eyes open″. For Spinoza, our actions are guided entirely by natural impulses. In his letter to G. H. Schuller (Letter 58), he wrote: \"men are conscious of their desire and unaware of the causes by which  are determined.\"

This picture of Spinoza's determinism is illuminated by this famous quote in Ethics: ″the infant believes that it is by free will that it seeks the breast; the angry boy believes that by free will he wishes vengeance; the timid man thinks it is with free will he seeks flight; the drunkard believes that by a free command of his mind he speaks the things which when sober he wishes he had left unsaid. … All believe that they speak by a free command of the mind, whilst, in truth, they have no power to restrain the impulse which they have to speak.″ Thus for Spinoza morality and ethical judgement like choice is predicated on an illusion. For Spinoza, ″Blame″ and ″Praise″ are nonexistent human ideals only fathomable in the mind because we are so acclimatized to human consciousness interlinking with our experience that we have a false idea of choice predicated upon this.

Spinoza's philosophy has much in common with Stoicism inasmuch as both philosophies sought to fulfil a therapeutic role by instructing people how to attain happiness. Spinoza, however, differed sharply from the Stoics in one important respect: He utterly rejected their contention that reason could defeat emotion. On the contrary, he contended, an emotion can only be displaced or overcome by a stronger emotion. For him, the crucial distinction was between active and passive emotions, the former being those that are rationally understood and the latter those that are not. He also held that knowledge of true causes of passive emotion can transform it to an active emotion, thus anticipating one of the key ideas of Sigmund Freud's psychoanalysis.

Ethical philosophy

Spinoza shared ethical beliefs with ancient Epicureans, in renouncing ethics beyond the material world, although Epicureans focused more on physical pleasure and Spinoza more on emotional wellbeing. Encapsulated at the start in his Treatise on the Improvement of the Understanding (Tractatus de intellectus emendatione) is the core of Spinoza's ethical philosophy, what he held to be the true and final good. Spinoza held good and evil to be relative concepts, claiming that nothing is intrinsically good or bad except relative to a particularity. Things that had classically been seen as good or evil, Spinoza argued, were simply good or bad for humans. Spinoza believes in a deterministic universe in which \"All things in nature proceed from certain  necessity and with the utmost perfection.\" Nothing happens by chance in Spinoza's world, and nothing is contingent.

Given Spinoza's insistence on a completely ordered world where \"necessity\" reigns, Good and Evil have no absolute meaning. The world as it exists looks imperfect only because of our limited perception.

Spinoza's Ethics

Main article: Ethics (Spinoza)

The opening page of Spinoza's magnum opus, Ethics

In the universe anything that happens comes from the essential nature of objects, or of God or Nature. According to Spinoza, reality is perfection. If circumstances are seen as unfortunate it is only because of our inadequate conception of reality. While components of the chain of cause and effect are not beyond the understanding of human reason, human grasp of the infinitely complex whole is limited because of the limits of science to empirically take account of the whole sequence. Spinoza also asserted that sense perception, though practical and useful, is inadequate for discovering truth. His concept of \"conatus\" states that human beings' natural inclination is to strive toward preserving an essential being, and asserts that virtue/human power is defined by success in this preservation of being by the guidance of reason as one's central ethical doctrine. According to Spinoza, the highest virtue is the intellectual love or knowledge of God/Nature/Universe.

Also in the \"Ethics\", Spinoza discusses his beliefs about what he considers to be the three kinds of knowledge that come with perceptions:

The first kind of knowledge he writes about is the knowledge of experiences. More precisely, this first type of knowledge can be known as the knowledge of things that could be \"mutilated, confused, and without order.\" Another explanation of what the first knowledge can be is that it is the knowledge of dangerous reasoning. Dangerous reason lacks any type of rationality, and causes the mind to be in a \"passive\" state. This type of \"passive mind\" that Spinoza writes about in the earlier books of The Ethics is a state of the mind in which adequate causes become passions.

Spinoza’s second knowledge involves reasoning plus emotions. He explains that this knowledge is had by the rationality of any adequate causes that have to do with anything common to the human mind. An example of this could be anything that is classified as being of imperfect virtue. Imperfect virtues are seen as those which are incomplete. Many philosophers, such as Thomas Aquinas and Aristotle, would compare imperfect virtue to pagan virtue.

Spinoza defines the third and final knowledge as the knowledge of God, which requires rationality and reason of the mind. In more detail, Spinoza uses this type of knowledge to join together the essence of God with the individual essence. This knowledge is also formed from any adequate causes that include perfect virtue.

In the final part of the Ethics, his concern with the meaning of \"true blessedness\", and his explanation of how emotions must be detached from external causes in order to master them, foreshadow psychological techniques developed in the 1900s. His concept of three types of knowledge—opinion, reason, intuition—and his assertion that intuitive knowledge provides the greatest satisfaction of mind, led to his proposition that the more we are conscious of ourselves and Nature/Universe, the more perfect and blessed we are (in reality) and that only intuitive knowledge is eternal.

History of reception

Pantheist, panentheist, or atheist?

Main article: Spinozism

See also: Pantheism controversy

An unfavorable engraving depiction of philosopher Spinoza, captioned in Latin, \"A Jew and an Atheist\".

It is a widespread belief that Spinoza equated God with the material universe. He has therefore been called the \"prophet\" and \"prince\" and most eminent expounder of pantheism. More specifically, in a letter to Henry Oldenburg he states, \"as to the view of certain people that I identify God with Nature (taken as a kind of mass or corporeal matter), they are quite mistaken\". For Spinoza, our universe (cosmos) is a mode under two attributes of Thought and Extension. God has infinitely many other attributes which are not present in our world.

According to German philosopher Karl Jaspers (1883–1969), when Spinoza wrote Deus sive Natura (Latin for 'God or Nature'), Spinoza meant God was natura naturans (nature doing what nature does; literally, 'nature naturing'), not natura naturata (nature already created; literally, 'nature natured'). Jaspers believed that Spinoza, in his philosophical system, did not mean to say that God and Nature are interchangeable terms, but rather that God's transcendence was attested by his infinitely many attributes, and that two attributes known by humans, namely Thought and Extension, signified God's immanence. Even God under the attributes of thought and extension cannot be identified strictly with our world. That world is of course \"divisible\"; it has parts. But Spinoza said, \"no attribute of a substance can be truly conceived from which it follows that the substance can be divided\", meaning that one cannot conceive an attribute in a way that leads to division of substance. He also said, \"a substance which is absolutely infinite is indivisible\" (Ethics, Part I, Propositions 12 and 13). Following this logic, our world should be considered as a mode under two attributes of thought and extension. Therefore, according to Jaspers, the pantheist formula \"One and All\" would apply to Spinoza only if the \"One\" preserves its transcendence and the \"All\" were not interpreted as the totality of finite things.

Martial Guéroult (1891–1976) suggested the term \"panentheism\", rather than \"pantheism\" to describe Spinoza's view of the relation between God and the world. The world is not God, but it is, in a strong sense, \"in\" God. Not only do finite things have God as their cause; they cannot be conceived without God. However, American panentheist philosopher Charles Hartshorne (1897–2000) insisted on the term Classical Pantheism to describe Spinoza's view.

In 1785, Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi published a condemnation of Spinoza's pantheism, after Gotthold Lessing was thought to have confessed on his deathbed to being a \"Spinozist\", which was the equivalent in his time of being called an atheist. Jacobi claimed that Spinoza's doctrine was pure materialism, because all Nature and God are said to be nothing but extended substance. This, for Jacobi, was the result of Enlightenment rationalism and it would finally end in absolute atheism. Moses Mendelssohn disagreed with Jacobi, saying that there is no actual difference between theism and pantheism. The issue became a major intellectual and religious concern for European civilization at the time.

The attraction of Spinoza's philosophy to late 18th-century Europeans was that it provided an alternative to materialism, atheism, and deism. Three of Spinoza's ideas strongly appealed to them:

the unity of all that exists;

the regularity of all that happens;

the identity of spirit and nature.

By 1879, Spinoza’s pantheism was praised by many, but was considered by some to be alarming and dangerously inimical.

Spinoza's \"God or Nature\" (Deus sive Natura) provided a living, natural God, in contrast to Isaac Newton's first cause argument and the dead mechanism of Julien Offray de La Mettrie's (1709–1751) work, Man a Machine (L'homme machine). Coleridge and Shelley saw in Spinoza's philosophy a religion of nature. Novalis called him the \"God-intoxicated man\". Spinoza inspired the poet Shelley to write his essay \"The Necessity of Atheism\".

Spinoza was considered to be an atheist because he used the word \"God\" (Deus) to signify a concept that was different from that of traditional Judeo–Christian monotheism. \"Spinoza expressly denies personality and consciousness to God; he has neither intelligence, feeling, nor will; he does not act according to purpose, but everything follows necessarily from his nature, according to law....\" Thus, Spinoza's cool, indifferent God is the antithesis to the concept of an anthropomorphic, fatherly God who cares about humanity.

According to the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Spinoza's God is an \"infinite intellect\" (Ethics 2p11c) — all knowing (2p3), and capable of loving both himself—and us, insofar as we are part of his perfection (5p35c). And if the mark of a personal being is that it is one towards which we can entertain personal attitudes, then we should note too that Spinoza recommends amor intellectualis dei (the intellectual love of God) as the supreme good for man (5p33). However, the matter is complex. Spinoza's God does not have free will (1p32c1), he does not have purposes or intentions (1 appendix), and Spinoza insists that \"neither intellect nor will pertain to the nature of God\" (1p17s1). Moreover, while we may love God, we need to remember that God is really not the kind of being who could ever love us back. \"He who loves God cannot strive that God should love him in return,\" says Spinoza (5p19).

Steven Nadler suggests that settling the question of Spinoza's atheism or pantheism depends on an analysis of attitudes. If pantheism is associated with religiosity, then Spinoza is not a pantheist, since Spinoza believes that the proper stance to take towards God is not one of reverence or religious awe, but instead one of objective study and reason, since taking the religious stance would leave one open to the possibility of error and superstition.

Comparison to Eastern philosophies

Similarities between Spinoza's philosophy and Eastern philosophical traditions have been discussed by many authors. The 19th-century German Sanskritist Theodor Goldstücker was one of the early figures to notice the similarities between Spinoza's religious conceptions and the Vedanta tradition of India, writing that Spinoza's thought was

... a western system of philosophy which occupies a foremost rank amongst the philosophies of all nations and ages, and which is so exact a representation of the ideas of the Vedanta, that we might have suspected its founder to have borrowed the fundamental principles of his system from the Hindus, did his biography not satisfy us that he was wholly unacquainted with their doctrines... We mean the philosophy of Spinoza, a man whose very life is a picture of that moral purity and intellectual indifference to the transitory charms of this world, which is the constant longing of the true Vedanta philosopher... comparing the fundamental ideas of both we should have no difficulty in proving that, had Spinoza been a Hindu, his system would in all probability mark a last phase of the Vedanta philosophy.

Max Müller, in his lectures, noted the striking similarities between Vedanta and the system of Spinoza, saying \"the Brahman, as conceived in the Upanishads and defined by Sankara, is clearly the same as Spinoza's 'Substantia'.\" Helena Blavatsky, a founder of the Theosophical Society also compared Spinoza's religious thought to Vedanta, writing in an unfinished essay \"As to Spinoza's Deity—natura naturans—conceived in his attributes simply and alone; and the same Deity—as natura naturata or as conceived in the endless series of modifications or correlations, the direct out-flowing results from the properties of these attributes, it is the Vedantic Deity pure and simple.\"

Spinoza's reception in the 19th and 20th centuries

Europe in the 19th and 20th centuries grew even more interested in Spinoza, often from a left-wing or Marxist perspective. Karl Marx liked Spinoza's account of the universe, interpreting it as materialistic. The philosophers Louis Althusser, Gilles Deleuze, Antonio Negri and Étienne Balibar have each drawn upon Spinoza's philosophy. Deleuze's doctoral thesis, published in 1968, calls him \"the prince of philosophers\". Nietzsche esteemed few philosophers, but he esteemed Spinoza. However, Nietzsche never read Spinoza's works themselves, but learned about Spinoza from Kuno Fischer's History of Modern Philosophy.

When George Santayana graduated from college, he published an essay, \"The Ethical Doctrine of Spinoza\", in The Harvard Monthly. Later, he wrote an introduction to Spinoza's Ethics and \"De intellectus emendatione\". In 1932, Santayana was invited to present an essay (published as \"Ultimate Religion\") at a meeting at The Hague celebrating the tricentennial of Spinoza's birth. In Santayana's autobiography, he characterized Spinoza as his \"master and model\" in understanding the naturalistic basis of morality.

Spinoza's religious criticism and its effect on the philosophy of language

Tractatus Theologico-Politicus

Philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein evoked Spinoza with the title (suggested to him by G. E. Moore) of the English translation of his first definitive philosophical work, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, an allusion to Spinoza's Tractatus Theologico-Politicus. Elsewhere, Wittgenstein deliberately borrowed the expression sub specie aeternitatis from Spinoza (Notebooks, 1914–16, p. 83). The structure of his Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus does have some structural affinities with Spinoza's Ethics (though, admittedly, not with the latter's own Tractatus) in erecting complex philosophical arguments upon basic logical assertions and principles. Furthermore, in propositions 6.4311 and 6.45 he alludes to a Spinozian understanding of eternity and interpretation of the religious concept of eternal life, stating that \"If by eternity is understood not eternal temporal duration, but timelessness, then he lives eternally who lives in the present.\" (6.4311) \"The contemplation of the world sub specie aeterni is its contemplation as a limited whole.\" (6.45)

Leo Strauss dedicated his first book, Spinoza's Critique of Religion, to an examination of the latter's ideas. In the book, Strauss identified Spinoza as part of the tradition of Enlightenment rationalism that eventually produced Modernity. Moreover, he identifies Spinoza and his works as the beginning of Jewish Modernity. More recently Jonathan Israel argued that, from 1650 to 1750, Spinoza was \"the chief challenger of the fundamentals of revealed religion, received ideas, tradition, morality, and what was everywhere regarded, in absolutist and non-absolutist states alike, as divinely constituted political authority.\"

Spinoza in literature, art, and popular culture

Spinoza has had influence beyond the confines of philosophy.

Spinoza has been the subject of numerous biographies and scholarly treatises.

Spinoza is an important historical figure in the Netherlands, where his portrait was featured prominently on the Dutch 1000-guilder banknote, legal tender until the euro was introduced in 2002. The highest and most prestigious scientific award of the Netherlands is named the Spinozaprijs (Spinoza prize). Spinoza was included in a 50 theme canon that attempts to summarise the history of the Netherlands. In 2014 a copy of Spinoza's Tractatus theologico-politicus was presented to the Chair of the Dutch Parliament, and shares a shelf with the Bible and the Quran.

Chronological list

17th century: The philosopher John Locke, who spent some time in Amsterdam, was influenced by his \"pioneering and profound conceptions of religious tolerance and democratic government,\" according to Cornel West.

1811–1833: In his autobiography From My Life: Poetry and Truth, Goethe recounts the way in which Spinoza's Ethics calmed the sometimes unbearable emotional turbulence of his youth. Goethe later displayed his grasp of Spinoza's metaphysics in a fragmentary elucidation of some Spinozist ontological principles entitled Study After Spinoza. Moreover, he cited Spinoza alongside Shakespeare and Carl Linnaeus as one of the three strongest influences on his life and work.

1856: The 19th-century novelist George Eliot produced her own translation of the Ethics, the first known English translation of it. Eliot liked Spinoza's vehement attacks on superstition.

1915: The 20th century novelist W. Somerset Maugham alluded to one of Spinoza's central concepts with the title of his novel Of Human Bondage (1915).

1922: Leopold Bloom is shown several times to be an admirer of Spinoza in James Joyce's Ulysses (1922). Thoughts from Spinoza, an anthology, is represented on Bloom's bookshelf towards the end of the novel.

1929: Albert Einstein named Spinoza as the philosopher who exerted the most influence on his world view (Weltanschauung). Spinoza equated God (infinite substance) with Nature, consistent with Einstein's belief in an impersonal deity. In 1929, Einstein was asked in a telegram by Rabbi Herbert S. Goldstein whether he believed in God. Einstein responded by telegram: \"I believe in Spinoza's God who reveals himself in the orderly harmony of what exists, not in a God who concerns himself with the fates and actions of human beings.\"

1944: The Argentine writer Jorge Luis Borges (1899 – 1986) was greatly influenced by Spinoza's worldview. Borges makes allusions to the philosopher's work in many of his poems and short stories, as does Isaac Bashevis Singer in his short story \"The Spinoza of Market Street\" (1944).

1966: In the early Star Trek episode \"Where No Man Has Gone Before\" (1966), the antagonist, Gary Mitchell is seen reading Spinoza, and Mitchell's remark regarding his ease in comprehending Spinoza implies that his intellectual capacity is increasing dramatically. The dialogue indicates that Captain Kirk is familiar with Spinoza's work, perhaps as part of his studies at Starfleet Academy.

1977: In the M*A*S*H episode \"Fade Out, Fade In, Part 2\" (1977), Major Charles Emerson Winchester, on his exile to Korea, describes himself as someone who \"can quote Spinoza from memory\".

1989: Spinoza's pantheism has also influenced environmental theory; Arne Næss (1912–2009), the father of the deep ecology movement, acknowledged Spinoza as an important inspiration.

1990: The title character of Hoffman's Hunger (1990), the fifth novel by the Dutch novelist Leon de Winter, reads and comments upon the Tractatus de Intellectus Emendatione over the course of the novel.

1993: PBS television series, Jeeves and Wooster (1993) Season 4 Episode 2 has Spinoza as a central part of the plot. This episode draws on the book Joy in the Morning by PG Wodehouse which also includes Jeeves desire to own a copy of the latest edition of Spinoza’s work.

2008: The 2008 play New Jerusalem, by David Ives, is based on the cherem (ban, shunning, ostracism, expulsion or excommunication) issued against Spinoza by the Talmud Torah congregation in Amsterdam in 1656, and events leading to it. Ives speculates that Spinoza was excommunicated in order to appease Dutch authorities who threatened to expel Amsterdam's Jews because of Spinoza's anti-religious activities amongst the city's Christian community.

2011: In Bento's Sketchbook (2011), the writer John Berger combines extracts from Spinoza, sketches, memoir, and observations in a book that contemplates the relationship of materialism to spirituality. According to Berger, what could be seen as a contradiction \"is beautifully resolved by Spinoza, who shows that it is not a duality, but in fact an essential unity.\"

Bibliography

c. 1660. Korte Verhandeling van God, de mensch en deszelvs welstand (A Short Treatise on God, Man and His Well-Being).

1662. Tractatus de Intellectus Emendatione (On the Improvement of the Understanding) (unfinished).

1663. Principia philosophiae cartesianae (The Principles of Cartesian Philosophy, translated by Samuel Shirley, with an Introduction and Notes by Steven Barbone and Lee Rice, Indianapolis, 1998). Gallica (in Latin).

1670. Tractatus Theologico-Politicus (A Theologico-Political Treatise).

1675–76. Tractatus Politicus (unfinished) (PDF version)

1677. Ethica Ordine Geometrico Demonstrata (The Ethics, finished 1674, but published posthumously)

1677. Compendium grammatices linguae hebraeae (Hebrew Grammar).

Morgan, Michael L. (ed.), 2002. Spinoza: Complete Works, with the Translation of Samuel Shirley, Indianapolis/Cambridge: Hackett Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-87220-620-5.

Edwin Curley (ed.), 1985–2016. The Collected Works of Spinoza (two volumes), Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Spruit, Leen and Pina Totaro, 2011. The Vatican Manuscript of Spinoza’s Ethica, Leiden: Brill.

See also

Biography portal

Philosophy portal

Criticism of Judaism

Pantheism

Philosophy of Baruch Spinoza

Plane of immanence

Spinozism

Uriel da Costa

Notes

^ However, Spinoza has also been interpreted as a defender of the coherence theory of truth.

References

^ Nadler 1999, p. 64.

^ Nadler 1999, p. 65.

^ Steven Nadler, Spinoza and Medieval Jewish Philosophy, Cambridge University Press, 2014, p. 27: \"Spinoza attended lectures and anatomical dissections at the University of Leiden...\"

^ Yitzhak Y. Melamed (ed.), The Young Spinoza: A Metaphysician in the Making, Oxford University Press, 2015, ch. 7.

^ James Kreines, Reason in the World: Hegel's Metaphysics and Its Philosophical Appeal, Oxford University Press, 2015, p. 25: \"Spinoza's foundationalism (Hegel argues) threatens to eliminate all determinate reality, leaving only one indeterminate substance.\"

^ Stefano Di Bella, Tad M. Schmaltz (eds.), The Problem of Universals in Early Modern Philosophy, Oxford University Press, 2017, p. 64 \"there is a strong case to be made that Spinoza was a conceptualist about universals...\"

^ Michael Della Rocca (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Spinoza, Oxford University Press, 2017, p. 288.

^ The Coherence Theory of Truth (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)

^ David, Marian (28 May 2015). Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Correspondence theory of truth – The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. Retrieved 14 May 2019 – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ Beth Lord, Spinoza Beyond Philosophy, Edinburgh University Press, 2015, p. 139.

^ Scruton 2002, \"Through the works of Moses Maimonides and the commentaries of the Arab Averroës, Spinoza would have become acquainted with Aristotle\".

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Anthony Gottlieb. \"God Exists, Philosophically (review of \"Spinoza: A Life\" by Steven Nadler)\". The New York Times, Books. 18 July 1999. Retrieved 7 September 2009.

^ a b c d e f Nadler 2001, p. 1.

^ \"Spinoza\". Collins English Dictionary. HarperCollins. Retrieved 27 April 2019.

^ \"Baruch\"

^ Nadler 2001, p. 45.

^ Popkin, Richard H. \"Benedict de Spinoza Dutch-Jewish philosopher\". Encyclopedia Brittannica. Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. Retrieved 7 July 2019.

^ Dutton, Blake D. \"Benedict De Spinoza (1632–1677)\". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy A peer-review academic resource. Retrieved 7 July 2019.

^ \"Spinoza\". Merriam-Webster Dictionary. Retrieved 27 April 2019.

^ Jonathan Israel in his various works on the Enlightenment, e.g., Israel, Jonathan (2001). Radical Enlightenment: Philosophy and the Making of Modernity, 1650–1750. (in the index \"Spinoza, Benedict (Baruch) de\") and Israel, Jonathan (2011). Democratic Enlightenment: Philosophy, Revolution, and Human Rights 1750–1790.

^ Yalom, Irvin (21 February 2012). \"The Spinoza Problem\". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 12 November 2013. Retrieved 7 March 2013.

^ Yovel, Yirmiyahu, Spinoza and Other Heretics: The Adventures of Immanence (Princeton University Press, 1992), p. 3

^ \"Destroyer and Builder\". The New Republic. 3 May 2012. Retrieved 7 March 2013.

^ a b c d e f Scruton 2002, p. 26.

^ Nadler 2001, p. 42.

^ Stewart, Matthew (2007). The Courtier and the Heretic: Leibniz, Spinoza, and the Fate of God in the Modern World. W. W. Norton Company. p. 352. ISBN 978-0393071047.

^ de Spinoza, Benedictus; Hessing, Siegfried (1977). Speculum Spinozanum, 1677–1977. Routledge Kegan Paul. p. 828.

^ a b Scruton 2002, p. 32.

^ Meeting, Hegel Society of America (1 January 2003). Hegel's History of Philosophy. ISBN 978-0791455432. Archived from the original on 13 May 2011. Retrieved 2 May 2011.

^ quoted in the translator's preface of Deleuze Expressionism in Philosophy: Spinoza (1990).

^ Magnusson 1990.

^ Scruton 2002, p. 15.

^ a b c Scruton 2002, p. 19.

^ a b c Scruton 2002, p. 20.

^ The family was probably expelled from Spain in 1492 and fled to Portugal. Portugal compelled them to convert to Catholicism in 1498. Cf. Javier Muguerza in his Desde la perplejidad; see also Ben-Menahem, Ari, Historical Encyclopedia of Natural and Mathematical Sciences, Volume 1 (Springer, 2009), p. 1095.

^ Israel, J. (1998), The Dutch Republic: Its Rise, Greatness, and Fall, 1477–1806, Oxford, Oxford University Press, pp. 4, 583, 677, 917.

^ De Dijn, Herman, Spinoza: The Way to Wisdom (Purdue University Press, 1996), pp. 3 4.

^ Nadler 2001, p. 195.

^ Curley, Edwin, \"Spinoza's exchange with Albert Burgh,\" in Melamed Rosenthal (eds.), Spinoza's Theological-Political Treatise: A Critical Guide (Cambridge University Press, 2010), pp. 11–28.

^ Historische Gids van Amsterdam, opnieuw bewerkt door Mr H.F. Wijnman, p. 205; Vaz Dias A.M. W.G. van der Tak (1932) Spinoza, Merchant autodidact, pp. 140, 174–75. Reprint in: Studia Resenthaliana. Vol. XVI, number 2, 1982.

^ Die Lebensgeschichte Spinozas. Zweite, stark erweiterte und vollständig neu kommentierte Auflage der Ausgabe von Jakob Freudenthal 1899. M. e. Bibliographie hg. v. Manfred Walther unter Mitarbeit v. Michael Czelinski. 2 Bde. Stuttgart-Bad Canstatt: frommann-holzboog, 2006. (Specula 4,1 – 4,2.) Erläuterungen. p. 98, 119.

^ Nadler 2001, p. 23, \"his mother's death when he was six years old\".

^ Nadler 1999, p. 47.

^ Scruton 2002, p. 8.

^ Scruton 2002, pp. 20–21.

^ a b c Nadler 2001, p. 27.

^ a b c Nadler 2001, p. 189.

^ Frank Mertens, Ghent University (30 June 2009). \"Franciscus van den Enden/Biography\". Retrieved 7 October 2011.

^ a b c d e Scruton 2002, p. 21.

^ Strathern, Paul (1998). Spinoza in 90 Minutes. Ivan R. Dee. pp. 24–25. ISBN 978-1-56663-215-7.

^ Johannes Colerus, The Life of Benedict de Spinosa (London: Benjamin Bragg, 1706), 4.

^ Nadler 1999, p. 104.

^ a b Spinoza, Benedictus de (4 September 1989). Tractatus Theologico-Politicus: Gebhardt Edition 1925. BRILL. ISBN 9004090991. Retrieved 4 September 2019 – via Google Books.

^ a b Nadler 2001, p. 25.

^ Nadler 2001, p. 26.

^ Nadler 2001, p. 120.

^ Book of Joshua 6, 26: \"And Joshua adjured them at that time, saying, Cursed be the man before the Lord, that riseth up and buildeth this city Jericho: he shall lay the foundation thereof in his firstborn, and in his youngest son shall he set up the gates of it.\"

^ Second Book of Kings 2, 23–24: \"And as he  was going up by the way, there came forth little children out of the city, and mocked him, and said unto him, Go up, thou bald head; go up, thou bald head. And he turned back, and looked on them, and cursed them in the name of the Lord. And there came forth two she bears out of the wood, and tare forty and two children of them.

^ a b c Yitzhak Melamed, Associate Professor of Philosophy, Johns Hopkins University, speaking at an Artistic Director's Roundtable, Theater J, Washington D.C., 18 March 2012.

^ Nadler 2001, p. 7.

^ Nadler 2001, p. 2.

^ Steven B. Smith, Spinoza's book of life: freedom and redemption in the Ethics, Yale University Press (1 December 2003), p. xx – Introduction via Google Books

^ Steven Nadler, Baruch Spinoza, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, First published Fri 29 June 2001; substantive revision Mon 1 December 2008, plato.standord.eu

^ Nadler 2001, pp. 17–22.

^ Nadler 2001, p. 19.

^ Nadler 2001, p. 20.

^ Nadler 2001, pp. 19–21.

^ Nadler 2001, p. 28.

^ a b c d e f Scruton 2002, p. 22.

^ Spinoza's Biography in the Encyclopædia Britannica. 14 February 2018.

^ Tirosh-Samuelson, Hava. 'The Bible in the Jewish Philosophical Tradition'. In Berlin, Adele. and Brettler, Marc Zvi, editors.(2014). The Jewish study Bible : Tanakh translation : . Oxford : Oxford University Press, p. 1931. ISBN 9780199978465.

^ Simon Rocker (28 August 2014). \"Why Baruch Spinoza is still excommunicated\". The Jewish Chronicle Online.

^ a b c GOTTLIEB, ANTHONY. \"God Exists, Philosophically\". The New York Times. Retrieved 14 July 2014.

^ Scruton 2002, p. 23.

^ Scruton 2002, p. 24.

^ a b Scruton 2002, p. 25.

^ \"…he  told me  he had a strong desire, on the day of the massacre of Mess. De Witt, to sally forth at night, and put up somewhere, near the place of the massacre, a paper with the words Ultimi barbarorum . But his host had shut the house to prevent his going out, for he would have run the risk of being torn to pieces.\" (A Refutation Recently Discovered of Spinoza by Leibnitz, \"Remarks on the Unpublished Refutation of Spinoza by Leibnitz,\" Edinburg: Thomas Constable and Company, 1855. p. 70. Available on via Internet Archive

^ Christiaan Huygens, Oeuvres complètes, Letter No. 1638, 11 May 1668

^ Christiaan Huygens, Oeuvres complètes, letter to his brother 23 September 1667

^ Nadler, Steven (2018). Spinoza: A Life. Cambridge University Press. p. 215. ISBN 9781108425544.

^ Nadler 2001, p. 183.

^ Christiaan Huygens, Oeuvres complètes, vol. XXII, p. 732, footnote

^ Theodore Kerckring, \"Spicilegium Anatomicum\" Observatio XCIII (1670)

^ Chauí 1995 (2001 ed.), ch. 1, pp. 30–31: |A commentary on Descartes' work, Principles of Cartesian Philosophy, only work published under his own name, brought him on an invitation to teach philosophy at the University of Heidelberg. Spinoza, however, refused, thinking that it might be demanded the renouncement of his freedom of thought, for the invite stipulated that all care should be taken to \"not insult the principles of the established religion.\"

^ a b c d Lucas, 1960.

^ Scruton 2002, p. 29.

^ Special Features (5 December 1926). \"Shrine will be made of old Spinoza home; Society That Bears His Name Seeks Fund to Buy Dwelling of Great Philosopher at The Hague on the 250th Anniversary of His Death\". The New York Times. Retrieved 8 September 2009.

^ Phelps, M. Stuart (21 February 1877). \"Spinoza. Oration by M. Ernest Renan, delivered at the Hague, February 21, 1877 by Translated by M. Stuart Phelps \". New Englander and Yale Review Volume 0037 Issue 147 (November 1878). Retrieved 8 September 2009.

^ a b c d e f g h i Harold Bloom (book reviewer) (16 June 2006). \"Deciphering Spinoza, the Great Original – Book review of \"Betraying Spinoza. The Renegade Jew Who Gave Us Modernity.\" By Rebecca Goldstein\". The New York Times. Retrieved 8 September 2009.

^ \"How Spinoza lived\". The New York Times. 17 March 1878. Retrieved 8 September 2009.

^ Popkin, Richard H., \"Spinoza de Spinoza\" in The Columbia History of Western Philosophy (Columbia University Press, 1999), p. 381.

^ a b Lisa Montanarelli (book reviewer) (8 January 2006). \"Spinoza stymies 'God's attorney' – Stewart argues the secular world was at stake in Leibniz face off\". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved 8 September 2009.

^ see Refutation of Spinoza

^ Stewart, Matthew, The Courtier and the Heretic (W.W. Norton Company, 2006), p. 106.

^ \"Spinoza on Islam\". 13 February 2012.

^ Spinoza, Baruch (2003). Correspondence of Spinoza. Translated by A. Wolf. Kessinger Publishing, LLC. p. 354.

^ Spinoza, Karl Jaspers p. 9

^ a b Charles Hartshorne and William Reese, \"Philosophers Speak of God,\" Humanity Books, 1953 ch. 4

^ a b Konstan, David (2016). Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. Retrieved 21 February 2017 – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ Ethics, Part IV, preface: \"Deus seu Natura\".

^ \"Baruch Spinoza, \"Human Beings are Determined\"\". Lander.edu. Retrieved 21 February 2017.

^ Baruch Spinoza. Ethics, in Spinoza: Complete Works, trans. by Samuel Shirley and ed. by Michael L. Morgan (Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing, 2002), see Part I, Proposition 33.

^ Ethics, Part I, Proposition 6.

^ Ethics, Pt. I, Prop. XXXVI, Appendix: \"en think themselves free inasmuch as they are conscious of their volitions and desires, and never even dream, in their ignorance, of the causes which have disposed them so to wish and desire.\"

^ Ethics, Part III, Proposition 2.

^ Scruton 2002, p. 86.

^ Cook, Vincent. \"Epicurus – Principal Doctrines\". Epicurus.net. Archived from the original on 7 April 2007. Retrieved 21 February 2017.

^ Spinoza, Benedict (1982). The Ethics.

^ a b Spinoza, Benedict (1677). \"Books 1–5\". The Ethics.

^ Picton, J. Allanson, \"Pantheism: Its Story and Significance\", 1905

^ Fraser, Alexander Campbell \"Philosophy of Theism\", William Blackwood and Sons, 1895, p. 163

^ Correspondence of Benedict de Spinoza, Wilder Publications (26 March 2009), ISBN 978-1-60459-156-9, letter 73

^ a b Karl Jaspers, Spinoza (Great Philosophers), Harvest Books (23 October 1974), ISBN 978-0-15-684730-8, pp. 14, 95

^ a b Genevieve Lloyd, Routledge Philosophy GuideBook to Spinoza and The Ethics (Routledge Philosophy Guidebooks), Routledge; 1 edition (2 October 1996), ISBN 978-0-415-10782-2, p. 40

^ Lange, Frederick Albert (1880). History of Materialism and Criticism of its Present Importance, Vol. II. Boston: Houghton, Osgood, Co. p. 147. Retrieved 11 November 2015.

^ \"The Pantheism of Spinoza Dr. Smith regarded as the most dangerous enemy of Christianity, and as he announced his conviction that it had gained the control of the schools, press and pulpit of the Old World , and was rapidly gaining the same control of the New , his alarm and indignation sometimes rose to the eloquence of genuine passion.\" Memorial of the Rev. Henry Smith, D.D., LL D., Professor of Sacred Rhetoric and Pastoral Theology in Lane Theological Seminary, Consisting of Addresses on Occasion of the Anniversary of the Seminary, May 8th, 1879, Together with Commemorative Resolutions, p. 26.

^ a b Hutchison, Percy (20 November 1932). \"Spinoza, \"God-Intoxicated Man\"; Three Books Which Mark the Three Hundredth Anniversary of the Philosopher's Birth\". The New York Times. Retrieved 8 September 2009.

^ Frank Thilly, A History of Philosophy, § 47, Holt Co., New York, 1914

^ \"I believe in Spinoza's God who reveals himself in the orderly harmony of what exists, not in a God who concerns himself with fates and actions of human beings.\" These words were spoken by Albert Einstein, upon being asked if he believed in God by Rabbi Herbert Goldstein of the Institutional Synagogue, New York, 24 April 1921, published in the New York Times, 25 April 1929; from Einstein: The Life and Times Ronald W. Clark, New York: World Publishing Co., 1971, p. 413; also cited as a telegram to a Jewish newspaper, 1929, Einstein Archive 33-272, from Alice Calaprice, ed., The Expanded Quotable Einstein, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University

^ \"Pantheism (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)\". plato.stanford.edu. Retrieved 3 October 2014.

^ \"Baruch Spinoza (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)\". Plato.stanford.edu. Retrieved 24 December 2011.

^ Literary Remains of the Late Professor Theodore Goldstucker, W. H. Allen, 1879. p. 32.

^ The Westminster Review, Volumes 78–79, Baldwin, Cradock, and Joy, 1862. p. 1862

^ Three Lectures on the Vedanta Philosophy. F. Max Muller. Kessinger Publishing, 2003. p. 123

^ H.P Blavatsky's Collected Writings, Volume 13, pp. 308–10. Quest Books

^ Deleuze, 1968.

^ Nietzsche, Friedrich, \"FOURTH DIVISION Concerning the Soul of Artists and Authors\", in Human, All-Too-Human: Parts One and Two: Pt. III (Dover Philosophical Classics), Kindle Edition (2012-03-15), Aphorism 157, p. 95.

^ Nietzsche, Friedrich, \"EIGHTH DIVISION A Glance at the State\", in Human, All-Too-Human: Parts One and Two: Pt. III (Dover Philosophical Classics), Kindle Edition (2012-03-15), Aphorism 475, p. 204.

^ Nietzsche, Friedrich, \"PART I Miscellaneous Maxims and Opinions\", in Human, All-Too-Human: Parts One and Two: Pt. III (Dover Philosophical Classics), Kindle Edition (2012-03-15), Aphorism 408, p. 356.

^ Andreas Urs Sommer: Nietzsche’s Readings on Spinoza. A Contextualist Study, Particularly on the Reception of Kuno Fischer, in: Journal of Nietzsche Studies 43/2 (2012), pp. 156–84.

^ George Santayana, \"The Ethical Doctrine of Spinoza\", The Harvard Monthly, 2 (June 1886: 144–52)

^ George Santayana, \"Introduction\", in Spinoza's Ethics and \"De intellectus emendatione\"(London: Dent, 1910, vii–xxii)

^ George Santayana, \"Ultimate Religion\", in Obiter Scripta, eds. Justus Buchler and Benjamin Schwartz (New York and London: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1936) 280–97.

^ George Santayana, Persons and Places (Cambridge, MA and London: MIT Press, 1986) 233–36.

^ Israel, J. (2001) Radical Enlightenment; Philosophy and the Making of Modernity 1650–1750, Oxford, Oxford University Press, p. 159.

^ \"Spinoza's First Biography Is Recovered; The oldest biography of Spinoza. Edited with Translations, Introduction, Annotations, c., by A. Wolf. 196 pp. New York: Lincoln Macveagh. The Dial Press\". The New York Times. 11 December 1927. Retrieved 8 September 2009.

^ Irwin Edman (22 July 1934). \"The Unique and Powerful Vision of Baruch Spinoza; Professor Wolfson's Long-Awaited Book Is a Work of Illuminating Scholarship. (Book review) The Philosophy of Spinoza. By Henry Austryn Wolfson\". The New York Times. Retrieved 8 September 2009.

^ Cummings, M E (8 September 1929). \"Roth Evaluates Spinoza\". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 8 September 2009.

^ \"Entoen.nu\". Entoen.nu. Archived from the original on 13 May 2011. Retrieved 2 May 2011.

^ \"Van der Ham biedt Verbeet Spinoza aan\". RTL Nieuws. 5 July 2012. Retrieved 30 November 2014.

^ West, Cornel (28 July 2006). \"The spirit of Spinoza\". The Boston Globe. Retrieved 6 December 2017.

^ \"Goethe: Studie nach Spinoza – Aufsätze und Rezensionen\". Textlog.de. 30 October 2007. Archived from the original on 13 May 2011. Retrieved 2 May 2011.

^ \"Linné on line – What people have said about Linnaeus\". Linnaeus.uu.se. Archived from the original on 8 June 2011. Retrieved 2 May 2011.

^ Joyce, James (1986). Ulysses. New York: Random House, Inc. pp. 280, 582, etc. ISBN 978-0-394-74312-7.

^ \"Einstein believes in \"Spinoza's God\"; Scientist Defines His Faith in Reply, to Cablegram From Rabbi Here. Sees a Divine Order But Says Its Ruler Is Not Concerned \"Wit  Fates and Actions of Human Beings.\"\". The New York Times. 25 April 1929. Retrieved 8 September 2009.

^ \"Einstein's Third Paradise, by Gerald Holton\". Aip.org. Archived from the original on 22 May 2011. Retrieved 2 May 2011.

^ Singer, Isaac Bashevis (February 1979). Spinoza of Market Street and Other ... ISBN 978-0374502560. Archived from the original on 13 May 2011. Retrieved 2 May 2011 – via Google Books.

^ \"MASH 6x01 - Fade Out, Fade In - Dailymotion Video\". Dailymotion. Retrieved 4 September 2019.

^ Rothenberg, David; Naess, Arne (2001). Ecology, community and lifestyle. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 10. ISBN 978-0-521-34873-7.

^ Ives 2009.

^ Wroe, Nicholas (22 April 2011). \"John Berger: a life in writing\". Retrieved 4 September 2019 – via www.theguardian.com.

^ See G. Licata, \"Spinoza e la cognitio universalis dell'ebraico. Demistificazione e speculazione grammaticale nel Compendio di grammatica ebraica\", Giornale di Metafisica, 3 (2009), pp. 625–61.

Further reading

Albiac, Gabriel , 1987. La sinagoga vacía: un estudio de las fuentes marranas del espinosismo. Madrid: Hiperión D.L. ISBN 978-84-7517-214-9

Balibar, Étienne, 1985. Spinoza et la politique (\"Spinoza and politics\") Paris: PUF.

Bennett, Jonathan, 1984. A Study of Spinoza's Ethics. Hackett.

Boucher, Wayne I., 1999. Spinoza in English: A Bibliography from the Seventeenth Century to the Present. 2nd edn. Thoemmes Press.

Boucher, Wayne I., ed., 1999. Spinoza: Eighteenth and Nineteenth-Century Discussions. 6 vols. Thoemmes Press.

Carlisle, Claire. \"Questioning Transcendence, Teleology and Truth\" in Kierkegaard and the Renaissance and Modern Traditions (ed. Jon Stewart. Farnham: Ashgate Publishing, 2009).

Chauí, Marilena Espinosa: uma filosofia da liberdade. São Paulo: Editora Moderna, 1995. 111 pp.

Damásio, António, 2003. Looking for Spinoza: Joy, Sorrow, and the Feeling Brain, Harvest Books, ISBN 978-0-15-602871-4

Deleuze, Gilles, 1968. Spinoza et le problème de l'expression. Trans. \"Expressionism in Philosophy: Spinoza\" Martin Joughin (New York: Zone Books).

———, 1970. Spinoza: Philosophie pratique. Transl. \"Spinoza: Practical Philosophy\".

———, 1990. Negotiations trans. Martin Joughin (New York: Columbia University Press).

Della Rocca, Michael. 1996. Representation and the Mind-Body Problem in Spinoza. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-509562-3

Garrett, Don, ed., 1995. The Cambridge Companion to Spinoza. Cambridge Uni. Press.

Gatens, Moira, and Lloyd, Genevieve, 1999. Collective imaginings : Spinoza, past and present. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-16570-9, 978-0-415-16571-6

Goldstein, Rebecca, 2006. Betraying Spinoza: The Renegade Jew Who Gave Us Modernity. Schocken. ISBN 978-0-8052-1159-7

Goode, Francis, 2012. Life of Spinoza. Smashwords edition. ISBN 978-1-4661-3399-0

Gullan-Whur, Margaret, 1998. Within Reason: A Life of Spinoza. Jonathan Cape. ISBN 978-0-224-05046-3

Hampshire, Stuart, 1951. Spinoza and Spinozism, OUP, 2005 ISBN 978-0-19-927954-8

Hardt, Michael, trans., University of Minnesota Press. Preface, in French, by Gilles Deleuze, available here: \"01. Préface à L'Anomalie sauvage de Negri\". Multitudes.samizdat.net. Archived from the original on 11 June 2011. Retrieved 2 May 2011.

Israel, Jonathan, 2001. The Radical Enlightenment, Oxford: Oxford University Press.

———, 2006. Enlightenment Contested: Philosophy, Modernity, and the Emancipation of Man 1670–1752, (ISBN 978-0-19-927922-7 hardback)

Ives 2009: Ives, David, New Jerusalem; The Interrogation of Baruch de Spinoza at Talmud Torah Congregation: Amsterdam, July 27, 1656, 2009 (Dramatists Play Service, Inc., New York, ISBN 978-0-8222-2385-6).

Kasher, Asa, and Shlomo Biderman. \"Why Was Baruch de Spinoza Excommunicated?\"

Kayser, Rudolf, 1946, with an introduction by Albert Einstein. Spinoza: Portrait of a Spiritual Hero. New York: The Philosophical Library.

Lloyd, Genevieve, 1996. Spinoza and the Ethics. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-10781-5, 978-0-415-10782-2

Lloyd, Genevieve, 2018. Reclaiming wonder . After the sublime. Edinburgh University Press. ISBN 978-1-4744-3311-2

LeBuffe, Michael. 2010. Spinoza and Human Freedom. Oxford University Press.

Lucas, P. G., 1960. \"Some Speculative and Critical Philosophers\", in I. Levine (ed.), Philosophy (London: Odhams)

Lovejoy, Arthur O., 1936. \"Plenitude and Sufficient Reason in Leibniz and Spinoza\" in his The Great Chain of Being. Harvard University Press: 144–82 (ISBN 978-0-674-36153-9). Reprinted in Frankfurt, H. G., ed., 1972. Leibniz: A Collection of Critical Essays. Anchor Books.

Macherey, Pierre, 1977. Hegel ou Spinoza, Maspéro (2nd ed. La Découverte, 2004).

———, 1994–98. Introduction à l'Ethique de Spinoza. Paris: PUF.

Magnusson 1990: Magnusson, M (ed.), Spinoza, Baruch, Chambers Biographical Dictionary, Chambers 1990, ISBN 978-0-550-16041-6.

Matheron, Alexandre, 1969. Individu et communauté chez Spinoza, Paris: Minuit.

Melamed, Yitzhak Y.: Spinoza’s Metaphysics: Substance and Thought (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013). xxii+232 pp.

Melamed, Yitzhak Y. (ed.): The Young Spinoza: A Metaphysician in the Making (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015).

Melamed, Yitzhak Y. (ed.): Spinoza’s Ethics: A Critical Guide(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2017).

Montag, Warren. Bodies, Masses, Power: Spinoza and his Contemporaries. (London: Verso, 2002).

Moreau, Pierre-François, 2003, Spinoza et le spinozisme, PUF (Presses Universitaires de France)

Nadler, Steven M. (1999). Spinoza: A Life. Cambridge University Press. p. 407. ISBN 978-0-521-55210-3.

Nadler, Steven M. (2001). Spinoza's Heresy: Immortality and the Jewish Mind. New York: Oxford University Press. p. 225. ISBN 978-0-19-926887-0.

Nadler 2006: Nadler, Steven, Spinoza's Ethics: An Introduction, 2006 (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge England, ISBN 978-0-521-83620-3).

Nadler 2011: Nadler, Steven, A Book Forged in Hell: Spinoza's Scandalous Treatise and the Birth of the Secular Age Archived 29 November 2019 at the Wayback Machine, 2011 (Princeton University Press, Princeton NJ, ISBN 978-0-691-13989-0).

Negri, Antonio, 1991. The Savage Anomaly: The Power of Spinoza's Metaphysics and Politics.

———, 2004. Subversive Spinoza: (Un)Contemporary Variations).

Popkin, R. H., 2004. Spinoza (Oxford: One World Publications)

Prokhovnik, Raia (2004). Spinoza and republicanism. Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire New York: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0333733905.

Ratner, Joseph, 1927. The Philosophy of Spinoza (The Modern Library: Random House)

Scruton, Roger (2002). Spinoza: A Very Short Introduction. OUP Oxford. p. 144. ISBN 978-0-19-280316-0.

Stewart, Matthew. The Courtier and the Heretic: Leibniz, Spinoza and the Fate of God. 2006. W.W. Norton

Stolze, Ted and Warren Montag (eds.), The New Spinoza; Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1997.

Strauss, Leo. Persecution and the Art of Writing. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press, 1952. Reprint. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988.

———ch. 5, \"How to Study Spinoza's Tractus Theologico-Politicus;\" reprinted in Strauss, Jewish Philosophy and the Crisis of Modernity, ed. Kenneth Hart Green (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1997), 181–233.

———Spinoza's Critique of Religion. New York: Schocken Books, 1965. Reprint. University of Chicago Press, 1996.

———, \"Preface to the English Translation\" reprinted as \"Preface to Spinoza's Critique of Religion,\" in Strauss, Liberalism Ancient and Modern (New York: Basic Books, 1968, 224–59; also in Strauss, Jewish Philosophy and the Crisis of Modernity, 137–77).

Smilevski, Goce. Conversation with SPINOZA. Chicago: Northwestern University Press, 2006.

Williams, David Lay. 2010. \"Spinoza and the General Will,\" The Journal of Politics, Vol. 72 (April): 341–56.

Wolfson, Henry A. \"The Philosophy of Spinoza\". 2 vols. Harvard University Press.

Yalom, I. (2012). The Spinoza Problem: A Novel. New York: Basic Books.

Yovel, Yirmiyahu, \"Spinoza and Other Heretics, Vol. 1: The Marrano of Reason.\" Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1989.

Yovel, Yirmiyahu, \"Spinoza and Other Heretics, Vol. 2: The Adventures of Immanence.\" Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1989.

Vinciguerra, Lorenzo Spinoza in French Philosophy Today. Philosophy Today, Vol. 53, No. 4, Winter 2009.

External links

 Wikiquote has quotations related to: Baruch Spinoza

 Wikisource has original works written by or about:

Benedictus de Spinoza

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Baruch de Spinoza.

Articles

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy:
\"Benedict de Spinoza\". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

\"Benedict de Spinoza: Epistemology\". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

\"Benedict de Spinoza: Metaphysics\". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

\"Benedict de Spinoza: Moral Philosophy\". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

\"Benedict de Spinoza: Political Philosophy\". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy:
\"Spinoza\" by Steven Nadler.

\"Spinoza's Psychological Theory\" by Michael LeBuffe.

\"Spinoza's Physical Theory\" by Richard Manning.

\"Spinoza's Political Philosophy\" by Justin Steinberg.

Dutton, Blake. \"Benedict De Spinoza\". Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

Bulletin Spinoza of the journal Archives de philosophie

Susan James on Spinoza on the Passions, Philosophy Bites podcast

Spinoza, the Moral Heretic by Matthew J. Kisner

BBC Radio 4 In Our Time programme on Spinoza

The Escamoth stating Spinoza's excommunication

Gilles Deleuze's lectures about Spinoza (1978–1981)

Spinoza in the Jewish Encyclopedia

Video lecture on Baruch Spinoza by Dr. Henry Abramson

Works

Spinoza Opera Carl Gebhardt's 1925 four volume edition of Spinoza's Works.

Works by Benedictus de Spinoza at Project Gutenberg

Works by or about Baruch Spinoza at Internet Archive

Works by Baruch Spinoza at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)

Works by Baruch Spinoza at Open Library

Refutation of Spinoza by Leibniz In full via Google Books

More easily readable versions of the Correspondence, Ethics Demonstrated in Geometrical Order and Treatise on Theology and Politics

EthicaDB Hypertextual and multilingual publication of Ethics

A Theologico-Political Treatise– English Translation

A Theologico-Political Treatise – English Translation (at sacred-texts.com)

A letter from Spinoza to Albert Burgh

Ethica Ordine Geometrico Demonstrata et in quinque partes distincta, in quibus agetur

Opera posthuma – Amsterdam 1677. Complete photographic reproduction, ed. by F. Mignini (Quodlibet publishing house website)

The Ethics of Benedict de Spinoza, translated by George Eliot, transcribed by Thomas Deegan

v

t

e

Baruch Spinoza (Benedictus de Spinoza)

Works by 
Tractatus de Intellectus Emendatione (1662)

Principia philosophiae cartesianae (1663)

Tractatus Theologico-Politicus (1670)

Tractatus Politicus (1675–1676)

Ethics (1677)

Concepts and theories 
Spinoza's philosophical system

Spinozism

Spinozistic ethics

Spinoza's theory of the emotions

Spinoza's conception of freedom

Spinoza's conception of true religion

Immanence

Conatus

Multitude

Sub specie aeternitatis

Causa sui

Deus sive Natura (\"God or Nature\")

Pantheism

Determinism

Neutral monism

Psychophysical parallelism

Affect

Natura naturans–natura naturata

Scientia intuitiva

Libertas philosophandi

Omnis determinatio est negatio

Secularism

Reception and interpretation

of Spinoza's thought 
Spinozists

Spinozist philosophers

Spinoza scholars

Translators of Spinoza

Spinoza's God (God-intoxicated man)

Pantheism controversy

Spinoza and German Idealism

Spinoza and German Romanticism (Spinoza and Goethe)

Neo-Spinozism

Spinoza in the history of psychology (Cultural-historical psychology)

Affect theory

Affective turn

Works about 
Cultural depictions

Spinoza (1951 book)

Spinoza: Practical Philosophy

New Jerusalem (2008 play)

Projects and recognitions 
Spinoza Prize

7142 Spinoza

Spinoza Institute (Netherlands)

Vereniging Het Spinozahuis (Netherlands)

Spinoza-Gesellschaft (Germany)

Spinoza (blog)

 Commons

 Wikiquote

 Wikisource texts

Links to related articles

v

t

e

Age of Enlightenment

Topics

Atheism

Capitalism

Civil liberties

Counter-Enlightenment

Critical thinking

Deism

Democracy

Empiricism

Encyclopédistes

Enlightened absolutism

Free markets

Haskalah

Humanism

Human rights

Liberalism

Liberté, égalité, fraternité

Methodological skepticism

Nationalism

Natural philosophy

Objectivity

Rationality

Rationalism

Reason

Reductionism

Sapere aude

Science

Scientific method

Socialism

Universality

Weimar Classicism

Thinkers

France 
Jean le Rond d'Alembert

René Louis d'Argenson

Pierre Bayle

Pierre Beaumarchais

Nicolas Chamfort

Émilie du Châtelet

Étienne Bonnot de Condillac

Marquis de Condorcet

René Descartes

Denis Diderot

Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle

Claude Adrien Helvétius

Baron d'Holbach

Louis de Jaucourt

Julien Offray de La Mettrie

Georges-Louis Leclerc

Gabriel Bonnot de Mably

Sylvain Maréchal

Jean Meslier

Montesquieu

Étienne-Gabriel Morelly

Blaise Pascal

François Quesnay

Guillaume Thomas François Raynal

Marquis de Sade

Anne Robert Jacques Turgot

Voltaire

Geneva 
Firmin Abauzit

Charles Bonnet

Jean-Jacques Burlamaqui

Jean-Louis de Lolme

Pierre Prévost

Jean-Jacques Rousseau

Antoine-Jacques Roustan

Horace Bénédict de Saussure

Jacob Vernes

Jacob Vernet

Germany 
Justus Henning Böhmer

Carl Friedrich Gauss

Johann Wolfgang von Goethe

Johann Gottfried von Herder

Theodor Gottlieb von Hippel

Wilhelm von Humboldt

Immanuel Kant

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz

Gotthold Ephraim Lessing

Georg Christoph Lichtenberg

Moses Mendelssohn

Samuel von Pufendorf

Friedrich Schiller

Christian Thomasius

Gabriel Wagner

Christian Felix Weiße

Christoph Martin Wieland

Thomas Wizenmann

Christian Wolff

Greece 
Neophytos Doukas

Theoklitos Farmakidis

Rigas Feraios

Theophilos Kairis

Adamantios Korais

Ireland 
George Berkeley

Robert Boyle

Edmund Burke

John Toland

Italy 
Cesare Beccaria

Gaetano Filangieri

Ferdinando Galiani

Luigi Galvani

Antonio Genovesi

Francesco Mario Pagano

Giovanni Salvemini

Pietro Verri

Giambattista Vico

Netherlands 
Balthasar Bekker

Pieter de la Court

Petrus Cunaeus

Hugo Grotius

François Hemsterhuis

Christiaan Huygens

Adriaan Koerbagh

Frederik van Leenhof

Antonie van Leeuwenhoek

Bernard Nieuwentyt

Baruch Spinoza

Jan Swammerdam

Hendrik Wyermars

Poland 
Tadeusz Czacki

Hugo Kołłątaj

Stanisław Konarski

Ignacy Krasicki

Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz

Stanisław August Poniatowski

Jędrzej Śniadecki

Stanisław Staszic

Józef Wybicki

Andrzej Stanisław Załuski

Józef Andrzej Załuski

Portugal 
Sebastião José de Carvalho e Melo

Romania 
Ion Budai-Deleanu

Dinicu Golescu

Petru Maior

Samuil Micu-Klein

Gheorghe Șincai

Russia 
Catherine II

Denis Fonvizin

Mikhail Kheraskov

Mikhail Lomonosov

Nikolay Novikov

Alexander Radishchev

Yekaterina Vorontsova-Dashkova

Serbia 
Dositej Obradović

Avram Mrazović

Spain 
José Cadalso

Charles III

Benito Jerónimo Feijóo y Montenegro

Leandro Fernández de Moratín

Valentin de Foronda

Gaspar Melchor de Jovellanos

Martín Sarmiento

Diego de Torres Villarroel

United Kingdom

(Scotland) 
Joseph Addison

Francis Bacon

James Beattie

Jeremy Bentham

Joseph Black

Hugh Blair

James Boswell

James Burnett, Lord Monboddo

Anthony Collins

Adam Ferguson

Edward Gibbon

Robert Hooke

David Hume

Francis Hutcheson

Samuel Johnson

John Locke

John Millar

Isaac Newton

William Ogilvie

Richard Price

Joseph Priestley

Thomas Reid

Shaftesbury

Adam Smith

Dugald Stewart

Mary Wollstonecraft

United States 
Benjamin Franklin

Thomas Jefferson

James Madison

George Mason

Thomas Paine

 Category

v

t

e

Metaphysics

Metaphysicians 
Parmenides

Plato

Aristotle

Plotinus

Duns Scotus

Thomas Aquinas

Francisco Suárez

Nicolas Malebranche

René Descartes

John Locke

David Hume

Thomas Reid

Immanuel Kant

Isaac Newton

Arthur Schopenhauer

Baruch Spinoza

Georg W. F. Hegel

George Berkeley

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz

Christian Wolff

Bernard Bolzano

Hermann Lotze

Henri Bergson

Friedrich Nietzsche

Charles Sanders Peirce

Joseph Maréchal

Ludwig Wittgenstein

Martin Heidegger

Alfred N. Whitehead

Bertrand Russell

Dorothy Emmet

G. E. Moore

Jean-Paul Sartre

Gilbert Ryle

Hilary Putnam

P. F. Strawson

R. G. Collingwood

Rudolf Carnap

Saul Kripke

W. V. O. Quine

G. E. M. Anscombe

Donald Davidson

Michael Dummett

D. M. Armstrong

David Lewis

Alvin Plantinga

Héctor-Neri Castañeda

Peter van Inwagen

Derek Parfit

Alexius Meinong

Ernst Mally

Edward N. Zalta

more ...

Theories 
Abstract object theory

Action theory

Anti-realism

Determinism

Dualism

Enactivism

Essentialism

Existentialism

Free will

Idealism

Libertarianism

Liberty

Materialism

Meaning of life

Monism

Naturalism

Nihilism

Phenomenalism

Realism

Physicalism

Platonic idealism

Relativism

Scientific realism

Solipsism

Subjectivism

Substance theory

Truthmaker theory

Type theory

Concepts 
Abstract object

Anima mundi

Being

Category of being

Causality

Causal closure

Choice

Cogito, ergo sum

Concept

Embodied cognition

Essence

Existence

Experience

Hypostatic abstraction

Idea

Identity

Information

Insight

Intelligence

Intention

Linguistic modality

Matter

Meaning

Memetics

Mental representation

Mind

Motion

Nature

Necessity

Notion

Object

Pattern

Perception

Physical object

Principle

Property

Qualia

Quality

Reality

Relation

Soul

Subject

Substantial form

Thought

Time

Truth

Type–token distinction

Universal

Unobservable

Value

more ...

Related topics 
Axiology

Cosmology

Epistemology

Feminist metaphysics

Interpretations of quantum mechanics

Mereology

Meta-

Ontology

Philosophy of mind

Philosophy of psychology

Philosophy of self

Philosophy of space and time

Teleology

Theoretical physics

 Category

 Philosophy portal

v

t

e

Epistemology

Epistemologists 
Thomas Aquinas

Augustine of Hippo

William Alston

Robert Audi

A. J. Ayer

George Berkeley

Laurence BonJour

Keith DeRose

René Descartes

John Dewey

Fred Dretske

Edmund Gettier

Alvin Goldman

Nelson Goodman

Paul Grice

Anil Gupta

Susan Haack

David Hume

Immanuel Kant

Søren Kierkegaard

Peter Klein

Saul Kripke

Hilary Kornblith

David Lewis

John Locke

G. E. Moore

John McDowell

Robert Nozick

Alvin Plantinga

Plato

Duncan Pritchard

James Pryor

Hilary Putnam

W. V. O. Quine

Thomas Reid

Bertrand Russell

Gilbert Ryle

Wilfrid Sellars

Susanna Siegel

Ernest Sosa

P. F. Strawson

Baruch Spinoza

Timothy Williamson

Ludwig Wittgenstein

Nicholas Wolterstorff

Vienna Circle

more...

Theories 
Coherentism

Constructivism

Contextualism

Empiricism

Evolutionary epistemology

Fallibilism

Feminist epistemology

Fideism

Foundationalism

Holism

Infinitism

Innatism

Naïve realism

Naturalized epistemology

Phenomenalism

Positivism

Rationalism

Reductionism

Reliabilism

Representational realism

Skepticism

Transcendental idealism

Concepts 
A priori knowledge

A posteriori knowledge

Analysis

Analytic–synthetic distinction

Belief

Common sense

Descriptive knowledge

Exploratory thought

Gettier problem

Induction

Internalism and externalism

Justification

Knowledge

Objectivity

Privileged access

Problem of induction

Problem of other minds

Perception

Procedural knowledge

Proposition

Regress argument

Simplicity

Speculative reason

Truth

more...

Related articles 
Outline of epistemology

Faith and rationality

Formal epistemology

Meta-epistemology

Philosophy of perception

Philosophy of science

Social epistemology

Category

Task Force

Stubs

Discussion

v

t

e

Psychology

History

Philosophy

Portal

Psychologist

Basic psychology 
Abnormal

Affective science

Affective neuroscience

Behavioral genetics

Behavioral neuroscience

Behaviorism

Cognitive/Cognitivism

Cognitive neuroscience
Social

Comparative

Cross-cultural

Cultural

Developmental

Differential

Ecological

Evolutionary

Experimental

Gestalt

Intelligence

Mathematical

Moral

Neuropsychology

Perception

Personality

Positive

Psycholinguistics

Psychophysiology

Quantitative

Social

Theoretical

Applied psychology 
Anomalistic

Applied behavior analysis

Assessment

Clinical

Coaching

Community

Consumer

Counseling

Critical

Educational

Ergonomics

Feminist

Forensic

Health

Industrial and organizational

Legal

Media

Medical

Military

Music

Occupational health

Pastoral

Political

Psychometrics

Psychotherapy

Religion

School

Sport and exercise

Suicidology

Systems

Traffic

Methodologies 
Animal testing

Archival research

Behavior epigenetics

Case study

Content analysis

Experiments

Human subject research

Interviews

Neuroimaging

Observation

Psychophysics

Qualitative research

Quantitative research

Self-report inventory

Statistical surveys

Psychologists

Wilhelm Wundt (1832–1920)

William James (1842–1910)

Ivan Pavlov (1849–1936)

Sigmund Freud (1856–1939)

Edward Thorndike (1874–1949)

Carl Jung (1875–1961)

John B. Watson (1878–1958)

Clark L. Hull (1884–1952)

Kurt Lewin (1890–1947)

Jean Piaget (1896–1980)

Gordon Allport (1897–1967)

J. P. Guilford (1897–1987)

Carl Rogers (1902–1987)

Erik Erikson (1902–1994)

B. F. Skinner (1904–1990)

Donald O. Hebb (1904–1985)

Ernest Hilgard (1904–2001)

Harry Harlow (1905–1981)

Raymond Cattell (1905–1998)

Abraham Maslow (1908–1970)

Neal E. Miller (1909–2002)

Jerome Bruner (1915–2016)

Donald T. Campbell (1916–1996)

Hans Eysenck (1916–1997)

Herbert A. Simon (1916–2001)

David McClelland (1917–1998)

Leon Festinger (1919–1989)

George A. Miller (1920–2012)

Richard Lazarus (1922–2002)

Stanley Schachter (1922–1997)

Robert Zajonc (1923–2008)

Albert Bandura (b. 1925)

Roger Brown (1925–1997)

Endel Tulving (b. 1927)

Lawrence Kohlberg (1927–1987)

Noam Chomsky (b. 1928)

Ulric Neisser (1928–2012)

Jerome Kagan (b. 1929)

Walter Mischel (1930–2018)

Elliot Aronson (b. 1932)

Daniel Kahneman (b. 1934)

Paul Ekman (b. 1934)

Michael Posner (b. 1936)

Amos Tversky (1937–1996)

Bruce McEwen (b. 1938)

Larry Squire (b. 1941)

Richard E. Nisbett (b. 1941)

Martin Seligman (b. 1942)

Ed Diener (b. 1946)

Shelley E. Taylor (b. 1946)

John Anderson (b. 1947)

Ronald C. Kessler (b. 1947)

Joseph E. LeDoux (b. 1949)

Richard Davidson (b. 1951)

Susan Fiske (b. 1952)

Roy Baumeister (b. 1953)

Lists 
Counseling topics

Disciplines

Important publications

Organizations

Outline

Psychologists

Psychotherapies

Research methods

Schools of thought

Timeline

Topics

Wiktionary definition

Wiktionary category

Wikisource

Wikimedia Commons

Wikiquote

Wikinews

Wikibooks

v

t

e

Philosophy of mind

Theories 
Behaviorism (Radical)

Biological naturalism

Cognitive psychology

Computationalism

Mind–body dualism

Eliminative materialism

Emergent materialism

Emergentism

Epiphenomenalism

Functionalism

Idealism

Interactionism

Materialism

Monism

Naïve realism
Neurophenomenology

Neutral monism

Occasionalism

Panpsychism

Psychoanalysis

Parallelism

Phenomenalism

Phenomenology

Physicalism
identity theory

Property dualism

Representational

Solipsism

Substance dualism

Concepts 
Abstract object

Artificial intelligence

Chinese room

Cognition

Cognitive closure

Concept

Concept and object

Consciousness

Hard problem of consciousness

Hypostatic abstraction

Idea

Identity

Ingenuity

Intelligence

Intentionality

Introspection

Intuition

Language of thought

Materialism

Mental event

Mental image

Mental property

Mental representation

Mind

Mind–body problem
Non-physical entity

New mysterianism

Pain

Privileged access

Problem of other minds

Propositional attitude

Qualia

Tabula rasa

Understanding

Zombie

more...

Related topics 
Metaphysics

Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self

Category

Philosophers category

Project

Task Force

 Philosophy portal

v

t

e

Philosophy of religion

Concepts in religion 
Afterlife

Euthyphro dilemma

Faith

Intelligent design

Miracle

Problem of evil

Religious belief

Soul

Spirit

Theodicy

Theological veto

Conceptions of God

Aristotelian view

Brahman

Demiurge

Divine simplicity

Egoism

Holy Spirit

Misotheism

Pandeism

Personal god

Process theology

Supreme Being

Unmoved mover

God in 
Abrahamic religions

Buddhism

Christianity

Hinduism

Islam

Jainism

Judaism

Mormonism

Sikhism

Baháʼí Faith

Wicca

Existence of God

For 
Beauty

Christological

Consciousness

Cosmological
Kalam

Contingency

Degree

Desire

Experience

Fine-tuning of the universe

Love

Miracles

Morality

Necessary existent

Ontological

Pascal's wager

Proper basis

Reason

Teleological
Natural law

Watchmaker analogy

Transcendental

Against 
747 gambit

Atheist's Wager

Evil

Free will

Hell

Inconsistent revelations

Nonbelief

Noncognitivism

Occam's razor

Omnipotence

Poor design

Russell's teapot

Theology 
Acosmism

Agnosticism

Animism

Antireligion

Atheism

Creationism

Dharmism

Deism

Demonology

Divine command theory

Dualism

Esotericism

Exclusivism

Existentialism
Christian

Agnostic

Atheistic

Feminist theology
Thealogy

Womanist theology

Fideism

Fundamentalism

Gnosticism

Henotheism

Humanism
Religious

Secular

Christian

Inclusivism

Theories about religions

Monism

Monotheism

Mysticism

Naturalism
Metaphysical

Religious

Humanistic

New Age

Nondualism

Nontheism

Pandeism

Panentheism

Pantheism

Perennialism

Polytheism

Possibilianism

Process theology

Religious skepticism

Spiritualism

Shamanism

Taoic

Theism

Transcendentalism

more...

Religious language 
Eschatological verification

Language game

Logical positivism

Apophatic theology

Verificationism

Problem of evil 
Augustinian theodicy

Best of all possible worlds

Euthyphro dilemma

Inconsistent triad

Irenaean theodicy

Natural evil

Theodicy

Philosophers

of religion

(by date active)

Ancient and

medieval 
Anselm of Canterbury

Augustine of Hippo

Avicenna

Averroes

Boethius

Erasmus

Gaunilo of Marmoutiers

Pico della Mirandola

Heraclitus

King James VI and I

Marcion of Sinope

Thomas Aquinas

Maimonides

Early modern 
Augustin Calmet

René Descartes

Blaise Pascal

Baruch Spinoza

Nicolas Malebranche

Gottfried W Leibniz

William Wollaston

Thomas Chubb

David Hume

Baron d'Holbach

Immanuel Kant

Johann G Herder

1800

1850 
Friedrich Schleiermacher

Karl C F Krause

Georg W F Hegel

William Whewell

Ludwig Feuerbach

Søren Kierkegaard

Karl Marx

Albrecht Ritschl

Afrikan Spir

1880

1900 
Ernst Haeckel

W K Clifford

Friedrich Nietzsche

Harald Høffding

William James

Vladimir Solovyov

Ernst Troeltsch

Rudolf Otto

Lev Shestov

Sergei Bulgakov

Pavel Florensky

Ernst Cassirer

Joseph Maréchal

1920

postwar 
George Santayana

Bertrand Russell

Martin Buber

René Guénon

Paul Tillich

Karl Barth

Emil Brunner

Rudolf Bultmann

Gabriel Marcel

Reinhold Niebuhr

Charles Hartshorne

Mircea Eliade

Frithjof Schuon

J L Mackie

Walter Kaufmann

Martin Lings

Peter Geach

George I Mavrodes

William Alston

Antony Flew

1970

1990

2010 
William L Rowe

Dewi Z Phillips

Alvin Plantinga

Anthony Kenny

Nicholas Wolterstorff

Richard Swinburne

Robert Merrihew Adams

Peter van Inwagen

Daniel Dennett

Loyal Rue

Jean-Luc Marion

William Lane Craig

Ali Akbar Rashad

Alexander Pruss

Related topics 
Criticism of religion

Ethics in religion

Exegesis

History of religion

Religion

Religious language

Religious philosophy

Relationship between religion and science

Faith and rationality

more...

 Portal

 Category

v

t

e

Philosophy of science

Concepts 
Analysis

Analytic–synthetic distinction

A priori and a posteriori

Causality

Commensurability

Consilience

Construct

Creative synthesis

Demarcation problem

Empirical evidence

Explanatory power

Fact

Falsifiability

Feminist method

Functional contextualism

Ignoramus et ignorabimus

Inductive reasoning

Intertheoretic reduction

Inquiry

Nature

Objectivity

Observation

Paradigm

Problem of induction

Scientific law

Scientific method

Scientific revolution

Scientific theory

Testability

Theory choice

Theory-ladenness

Underdetermination

Unity of science

Metatheory

of science 
Coherentism

Confirmation holism

Constructive empiricism

Constructive realism

Constructivist epistemology

Contextualism

Conventionalism

Deductive-nomological model

Hypothetico-deductive model

Inductionism

Epistemological anarchism

Evolutionism

Fallibilism

Foundationalism

Instrumentalism

Pragmatism

Model-dependent realism

Naturalism

Physicalism

Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism

Rationalism / Empiricism

Received view / Semantic view of theories

Scientific realism / Anti-realism

Scientific essentialism

Scientific formalism

Scientific skepticism

Scientism

Structuralism

Uniformitarianism

Vitalism

Philosophy of 
Physics
thermal and statistical

Motion

Chemistry

Biology

Geography

Social science

Technology
Engineering

Artificial intelligence

Computer science

Information

Mind

Psychiatry

Psychology

Perception

Space and time

Related topics 
Alchemy

Criticism of science

Descriptive science

Epistemology

Faith and rationality

Hard and soft science

History and philosophy of science

History of science

History of evolutionary thought

Logic

Metaphysics

Normative science

Pseudoscience

Relationship between religion and science

Rhetoric of science

Science studies

Sociology of scientific knowledge

Sociology of scientific ignorance

Philosophers of science by era

Ancient 
Plato

Aristotle

Stoicism

Epicureans

Medieval 
Averroes

Avicenna

Roger Bacon

William of Ockham

Hugh of Saint Victor

Dominicus Gundissalinus

Robert Kilwardby

Early modern 
Francis Bacon

Thomas Hobbes

René Descartes

Galileo Galilei

Pierre Gassendi

Isaac Newton

David Hume

Late modern 
Immanuel Kant

Friedrich Schelling

William Whewell

Auguste Comte

John Stuart Mill

Herbert Spencer

Wilhelm Wundt

Charles Sanders Peirce

Wilhelm Windelband

Henri Poincaré

Pierre Duhem

Rudolf Steiner

Karl Pearson

Contemporary 
Alfred North Whitehead

Bertrand Russell

Albert Einstein

Otto Neurath

C. D. Broad

Michael Polanyi

Hans Reichenbach

Rudolf Carnap

Karl Popper

Carl Gustav Hempel

W. V. O. Quine

Thomas Kuhn

Imre Lakatos

Paul Feyerabend

Jürgen Habermas

Ian Hacking

Bas van Fraassen

Larry Laudan

Daniel Dennett

Category

 Philosophy portal

 Science portal

v

t

e

Social and political philosophy

Ancient

philosophers 
Aristotle

Chanakya

Cicero

Confucius

Han Fei

Lactantius

Laozi

Mencius

Mozi

Origen

Plato

Polybius

Shang

Socrates

Sun Tzu

Tertullian

Thucydides

Valluvar

Xenophon

Xunzi

Medieval

philosophers 
Alpharabius

Augustine

Averroes

Baldus

Bartolus

Bruni

Dante

Gelasius

al-Ghazali

Giles

Hostiensis

Ibn Khaldun

John of Paris

John of Salisbury

Latini

Maimonides

Marsilius

Nizam al-Mulk

Photios

Thomas Aquinas

Wang

William of Ockham

Early modern

philosophers 
Beza

Bodin

Bossuet

Botero

Buchanan

Calvin

Cumberland

Duplessis-Mornay

Erasmus

Filmer

Grotius

Guicciardini

Harrington

Hayashi

Hobbes

Hotman

Huang

Leibniz

Locke

Luther

Machiavelli

Malebranche

Mariana

Milton

Montaigne

More

Müntzer

Naudé

Pufendorf

Rohan

Sansovino

Sidney

Spinoza

Suárez

18th–19th-century

philosophers 
Bakunin

Bentham

Bonald

Bosanquet

Burke

Comte

Constant

Emerson

Engels

Fichte

Fourier

Franklin

Godwin

Hamann

Hegel

Herder

Hume

Jefferson

Justi

Kant
political philosophy

Kierkegaard

Le Bon

Le Play

Madison

Maistre

Marx

Mazzini

Mill

Montesquieu

Möser

Nietzsche

Novalis

Paine

Renan

Rousseau

Royce

Sade

Schiller

Smith

Spencer

Stirner

Taine

Thoreau

Tocqueville

Vico

Vivekananda

Voltaire

20th–21st-century

philosophers 
Adorno

Ambedkar

Arendt

Aurobindo

Aron

Azurmendi

Badiou

Baudrillard

Bauman

Benoist

Berlin

Bernstein

Butler

Camus

Chomsky

De Beauvoir

Debord

Du Bois

Durkheim

Dworkin

Foucault

Gandhi

Gauthier

Gehlen

Gentile

Gramsci

Habermas

Hayek

Heidegger

Irigaray

Kautsky

Kirk

Kropotkin

Laclau

Lenin

Luxemburg

Mao

Mansfield

Marcuse

Maritain

Michels

Mises

Mou

Mouffe

Negri

Niebuhr

Nozick

Nursî

Oakeshott

Ortega

Pareto

Pettit

Plamenatz

Polanyi

Popper

Qutb

Radhakrishnan

Rand

Rawls

Rothbard

Russell

Santayana

Sartre

Scanlon

Schmitt

Searle

Shariati

Simmel

Simonović

Skinner

Sombart

Sorel

Spann

Spirito

Strauss

Sun

Taylor

Walzer

Weber

Žižek

Social theories 
Anarchism

Authoritarianism

Collectivism

Communism

Communitarianism

Conflict theories

Confucianism

Consensus theory

Conservatism

Contractualism

Cosmopolitanism

Culturalism

Fascism

Feminist political theory

Gandhism

Individualism

Islam

Islamism

Legalism

Liberalism

Libertarianism

Mohism

National liberalism

Republicanism

Social constructionism

Social constructivism

Social Darwinism

Social determinism

Socialism

Utilitarianism

Concepts 
Civil disobedience

Democracy

Four occupations

Justice

Law

Mandate of Heaven

Peace

Property

Revolution

Rights

Social contract

Society

War

more...

Related articles 
Jurisprudence

Philosophy and economics

Philosophy of education

Philosophy of history

Philosophy of love

Philosophy of sex

Philosophy of social science

Political ethics

Social epistemology

Category

v

t

e

Jurisprudence

Legal theory 
Critical legal studies

Comparative law

Economic analysis

Legal norms

International legal theory

Legal history

Philosophy of law

Sociology of law

Philosophers 
Alexy

Allan

Aquinas

Aristotle

Austin

Beccaria

Bentham

Betti

Bickel

Blackstone

Bobbio

Bork

Brożek

Cardozo

Castanheira Neves

Chafee

Coleman

Del Vecchio

Durkheim

Dworkin

Ehrlich

Feinberg

Fineman

Finnis

Frank

Fuller

Gardner

George

Green

Grisez

Grotius

Gurvitch

Habermas

Han

Hart

Hegel

Hobbes

Hohfeld

Hägerström

Jellinek

Jhering

Kant

Kelsen

Köchler

Kramer

Llewellyn

Lombardía

Luhmann

Lundstedt

Lyons

MacCormick

Marx

Nussbaum

Olivecrona

Pashukanis

Perelman

Petrażycki

Pontes de Miranda

Posner

Pound

Puchta

Pufendorf

Radbruch

Rawls

Raz

Reale

Reinach

Renner

Ross

Rumi

Savigny

Scaevola

Schauer

Schmitt

Shang

Simmonds

Somló

Suárez

Tribe

Unger

Voegelin

Waldron

Walzer

Weber

Wronkowska

Ziembiński

Znamierowski

Theories 
Analytical jurisprudence

Deontological ethics

Fundamental theory of canon law

Interpretivism

Legalism

Legal moralism

Legal positivism

Legal realism

Libertarian theories of law

Natural law

Paternalism

Utilitarianism

Virtue jurisprudence

Concepts 
Dharma

Fa

Judicial interpretation

Justice

Legal system

Li

Rational-legal authority

Usul al-Fiqh

Related articles 
Law

Political philosophy

Index

 Category

 Law portal

Philosophy portal

 WikiProject Law

WikiProject Philosophy

changes

v

t

e

Ethics

Theories 
Casuistry

Consequentialism

Deontology
Kantian ethics

Ethics of care

Existentialist ethics

Meta-ethics

Particularism

Pragmatic ethics

Role ethics

Virtue ethics

Concepts 
Autonomy

Axiology

Belief

Conscience

Consent

Equality

Care

Free will

Good and evil
Good

Evil

Happiness

Ideal

Immorality

Justice

Liberty

Morality

Norm

Freedom

Principles

Suffering or Pain

Stewardship

Sympathy

Trust

Value

Virtue

Worldview

Wrong

full index...

Philosophers 
Laozi

Socrates

Plato

Aristotle

Diogenes

Valluvar

Cicero

Confucius

Augustine of Hippo

Mencius

Mozi

Xunzi

Thomas Aquinas

Baruch Spinoza

David Hume

Immanuel Kant

Georg W. F. Hegel

Arthur Schopenhauer

Jeremy Bentham

John Stuart Mill

Søren Kierkegaard

Henry Sidgwick

Friedrich Nietzsche

G. E. Moore

Karl Barth

Paul Tillich

Dietrich Bonhoeffer

Philippa Foot

John Rawls

John Dewey

Bernard Williams

J. L. Mackie

G. E. M. Anscombe

William Frankena

Alasdair MacIntyre

R. M. Hare

Peter Singer

Derek Parfit

Thomas Nagel

Robert Merrihew Adams

Charles Taylor

Joxe Azurmendi

Christine Korsgaard

Martha Nussbaum

more...

Applied ethics 
Bioethics

Business ethics

Discourse ethics

Engineering ethics

Environmental ethics

Legal ethics

Machine ethics

Media ethics

Medical ethics

Nursing ethics

Professional ethics

Sexual ethics

Ethics of eating meat

Ethics of technology

Ethics of terraforming

Meta-ethics 
Cognitivism
Moral realism
Ethical naturalism

Ethical non-naturalism

Ethical subjectivism
Ideal observer theory

Divine command theory

Error theory

Non-cognitivism
Emotivism

Quasi-realism

Universal prescriptivism

Moral universalism
Value monism – Value pluralism

Moral relativism

Moral nihilism

Empiricism

Moral rationalism

Ethical intuitionism

Moral skepticism

Related articles 
Christian ethics

Descriptive ethics

Ethics in religion

Evolutionary ethics

Feminist ethics

History of ethics

Ideology

Islamic ethics

Jewish ethics

Moral psychology

Normative ethics

Philosophy of law

Political philosophy

Population ethics

Social philosophy

 Category

v

t

e

Skepticism

Types 
Philosophical

Moral

Scientific

Religious

Local

Radical

Skeptical philosophies 
Academic Skepticism
Arcesilaus

Lacydes

Carneades

Clitomachus

Philo of Larissa

Ajñana

Buddhism

Cartesian

Charvaka

Cyrenaicism

Madhyamaka

Pyrrhonism
Pyrrho

Timon

Aenesidemus

Agrippa

Sextus Empiricus

Xenophanes

Skeptical arguments 
Acatalepsy

Ten Modes of Aenesidemus

Five Modes of Agrippa

Anatta

Impermanence

Münchhausen trilemma

Non-essentialism

Problem of the criterion

Problem of induction

Ship of Theseus

Wax argument

Skeptical hypotheses 
Evil genius

Brain in a vat

Dream argument

Omphalos hypothesis

Simulation hypothesis

Responses 
Here is one hand

Semantic externalism

Process reliabilism

Epistemic closure

Contextualism

Relativism

Lists 
List of books about skepticism

List of scientific skeptics

List of skeptical conferences

List of skeptical magazines

List of skeptical organizations

List of skeptical podcasts

v

t

e

The Bible and history

General studies 
Biblical criticism

Biblical studies

History of ancient Israel and Judah

Quest for the historical Jesus

Jesus in comparative mythology

Historicity 
Biblical archaeology

Historicity of Jesus
sources

Historicity of the Bible

Historical reliability of the Gospels

List of artifacts in biblical archaeology

List of biblical figures identified in extra-biblical sources

List of burial places of biblical figures

List of Hebrew Bible manuscripts

List of New Testament papyri

List of New Testament uncials

Historical Jesus

Criticism 
Criticism of the Bible

Christ myth theory

Bible Portal

v

t

e

Criticism of religion

By religion 
Bahá'í Faith

Buddhism

Christianity
Catholic

Jehovah's Witnesses

Latter Day Saint movement

Protestantism

Seventh-day Adventist

Unification movement

Westboro Baptist Church

Hinduism
Swaminarayan sect

Islam
Islamism

Twelver Shia Islam

Wahhabism

Jainism

Judaism

Monotheism

New religious movement

Scientology

Sikhism

Yazdânism

Zoroastrianism

Religious texts 
Bible

Quran

Hadiths

Mormon sacred texts
Book of Mormon

Talmud

Religious figures 
Aisha

Charles Taze Russell

Ellen White

Jesus

Moses

Muhammad

Mirza Ghulam Ahmad

Saul

Religious violence 
Buddhism

Christianity
Mormonism

Judaism

Islam

Terrorism
Christian

Hindu

Islamic

Jewish

Persecution
Christian thought on persecution and tolerance

War
In Islam

In Judaism

Sectarian violence

By country
India
Anti-Christian violence

In Odisha

Nigeria

Pakistan

Books 
Atheist Manifesto

Breaking the Spell

Christianity Unveiled

God in the Age of Science?

God Is Not Great

God: The Failed Hypothesis

Letter to a Christian Nation

The Age of Reason

The Blind Watchmaker

The Caged Virgin

The End of Faith

The God Delusion

The Gospel of the Flying Spaghetti Monster

The Rage Against God

Why I Am Not a Christian

Why I Am Not a Muslim

Books critical of Christianity

Books critical of Islam

Movements 
Agnosticism

Antitheism

Atheism

Criticism of atheism

Cārvāka

New Atheism

Nontheistic religions

Parody religion

Authority control 
BIBSYS: 90061235

BNC: 000039889

BNE: XX892756

BNF: cb11925350v (data)

BPN: 54355304

CANTIC: a10452072

CiNii: DA00217578

GND: 118616242

ISNI: 0000 0001 2277 3344

LCCN: n79018753

LNB: 000017813

MusicBrainz: d5587441-9bdd-410b-a8f8-2fa320b5fdae

NDL: 00457332

NKC: jn19981002153

NLA: 35517098

NLG: 67408

NLI: 000125504

NLK: KAC200210456

NLP: A11806928

NLR: 000207887

NSK: 000003752

NTA: 068360002

RERO: 02-A000154672

ICCU: IT\\ICCU\\CFIV\\036328

SELIBR: 93498

SNAC: w6v129sq

SUDOC: 085696625

Trove: 981574

ULAN: 500341371

VIAF: 22149024

 WorldCat Identities: lccn-n79018753

"

