"For the regions of the sovereign state, see Bosnia (region) and Herzegovina.

\"Bosnia\" redirects here. For other uses, see Bosnia (disambiguation).

Country in the Balkans

Bosnia and Herzegovina

Bosna i Hercegovina

Босна и Херцеговина

 Flag

 Coat of arms

Anthem: \"Državna himna Bosne i Hercegovine\" / \"Државна химна Босне и Херцеговине\"

Location of Bosnia and Herzegovina (green)in Europe (dark grey)

Capital

and largest city

Sarajevo

43°52′N 18°25′E / 43.867°N 18.417°E / 43.867; 18.417

Official languages (state level) None

Official languages (entity level) Bosnian

Serbian

Croatian

Demonym(s) Bosnian, Herzegovinian

Government Federal parliamentary

constitutional republic

• High Representative

Valentin Inzkoa

• Chairman of the Presidency

Šefik Džaferovićb

• Members of the Presidency

Željko Komšićc

Milorad Dodikd

• Chairman of the Council of Ministers

Zoran Tegeltija

Legislature Parliamentary Assembly

• Upper house

House of Peoples

• Lower house

House of Representatives

Establishment history

• Bosnia (early medieval polity)

c. 7th century

• Banate of Bosnia

1154

• Kingdom of Bosnia

1377

• Ottoman conquest

1463

• Austro-Hungarian conquest and 1908 annexation

1878

• Creation of Yugoslavia

1 December 1918

• ZAVNOBiH

25 November 1943

• Independence from Yugoslavia

1 March 1992

• Washington Agreement

18 March 1994

• Dayton Agreement

14 December 1995

Area

• Total

51,129 km2 (19,741 sq mi) (125th)

• Water (%)

1.4%

Population

• 2019 estimate

3,301,000 (135th)

• 2016 census

3,511,372

• Density

69/km2 (178.7/sq mi)

GDP (PPP) 2020 estimate

• Total

$52.103 billion

• Per capita

$14,894

GDP (nominal) 2020 estimate

• Total

$21.023 billion

• Per capita

$6,056

Gini (2011) 33.8

medium · 47th

HDI (2018) 0.769

high · 75th

Currency Convertible mark (BAM)

Time zone UTC+01 (CET)

• Summer (DST)

UTC+02 (CEST)

Date format dd. mm. yyyy. (CE)

Driving side right

Calling code +387

ISO 3166 code BA

Internet TLD .ba

The High Representative is an international civilian overseer of the Dayton peace agreement with authority to dismiss elected and non-elected officials and enact legislation.

Chair of current presidency (Bosniak)

Current presidency member (Croat)

Current presidency member (Serb)

Bosnia and Herzegovina, abbreviated BiH or B&H, sometimes called Bosnia–Herzegovina and often known informally as Bosnia, is a country in South and Southeast Europe, located within the Balkans. Sarajevo is the capital and largest city.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is bordered by Serbia to the east, Montenegro to the southeast, and Croatia to the north and southwest. It is not entirely landlocked - to the south it has a narrow coast on the Adriatic Sea, which is about 20 kilometres (12 miles) long and surrounds the town of Neum. The inland Bosnia region has a moderate continental climate, with hot summers and cold, snowy winters. In the central and eastern interior of the country the geography is mountainous, in the northwest moderately hilly, and in the northeast predominantly flatland. The smaller southern region, Herzegovina, has a Mediterranean climate and mostly mountainous topography.

Bosnia and Herzegovina was settled at least from Upper Palaeolithic and has preserved prehistoric art found in Badanj cave. The permanent human settlement traces back to the Neolithic age, inhabited by cultures such as Butmir, Kakanj, and Vučedol. After arrival of the first Indo-Europeans it was populated by several Illyrian and Celtic civilizations. Culturally, politically, and socially, the country has a rich but complex history, having been first settled by the South Slavic peoples that populate the area today from the 6th through to the 9th centuries. In the 12th century the Banate of Bosnia was established, which evolved into the Kingdom of Bosnia in the 14th century, after which it was annexed into the Ottoman Empire, under whose rule it remained from the mid-15th to the late 19th centuries. The Ottomans brought Islam to the region, and altered much of the cultural and social outlook of the country. This was followed by annexation into the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy, which lasted up until World War I. In the interwar period, Bosnia and Herzegovina was part of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia and after World War II, it was granted full republic status in the newly formed Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. Following the dissolution of Yugoslavia, the republic proclaimed independence in 1992, which was followed by the Bosnian War, lasting until late 1995 with the Dayton Agreement.

The country is home to three main ethnic groups or, officially, constituent peoples, as specified in the constitution. Bosniaks are the largest group of the three, with Serbs second, and Croats third. A native of Bosnia and Herzegovina, regardless of ethnicity, is usually identified in English as a Bosnian. Minorities, defined under the constitutional nomenclature \"Others\", include Jews, Roma, Ukrainians, and Turks. Bosnia and Herzegovina has a bicameral legislature and a three-member Presidency composed of a member of each major ethnic group. However, the central government's power is highly limited, as the country is largely decentralized and comprises two autonomous entities: the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Republika Srpska, with a third unit, the Brčko District, governed under local government. The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina consists of 10 cantons.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is a developing country and ranks 75th in terms of human development. Its economy is dominated by the industry and agriculture sectors, followed by the tourism and service sectors. The country has a social security and universal healthcare system, and primary- and secondary-level education is tuition-free. It is a member of the UN, OSCE, Council of Europe, PfP, CEFTA, and a founding member of the Union for the Mediterranean upon its establishment in July 2008. The country is an applicant for membership to the European Union and has been a candidate for NATO membership since April 2010, when it received a Membership Action Plan. Bosnia and Herzegovina also experienced a significant rise in tourism in recent years.

Contents

1 Etymology

2 History

2.1 Early history

2.2 Ancient Illyrians

2.3 Middle Ages

2.4 Ottoman Bosnia (1463–1878)

2.5 Austro-Hungarian rule (1878–1918)

2.6 Kingdom of Yugoslavia (1918–1941)

2.7 World War II (1941–45)

2.8 Socialist Federative Republic of Yugoslavia (1945–1992)

2.9 Bosnian War (1992–1995)

2.10 Protests in 2014

3 Geography

4 Government

4.1 Military

4.2 Foreign relations

5 Demographics

5.1 Ethnic groups

5.2 Languages

5.3 Religion

5.4 Cities

6 Economy

6.1 Transport

6.2 Communications

6.3 Tourism

6.3.1 Tourist attractions

7 Education

8 Culture

8.1 Architecture

8.2 Media

8.3 Literature

8.4 Art

8.5 Music

8.6 Cinema and theatre

8.7 Cuisine

8.8 Leisure activities

8.9 Sports

9 See also

10 Notes

11 References

12 Bibliography

13 External links

Etymology

The first preserved widely acknowledged mention of Bosnia is in De Administrando Imperio, a politico-geographical handbook written by the Byzantine emperor Constantine VII in the mid-10th century (between 948 and 952) describing the \"small land\" (χωρίον in Greek) of \"Bosona\" (Βοσώνα).

The name is believed to have derived from the hydronym of the river Bosna coursing through the Bosnian heartland. According to philologist Anton Mayer the name Bosna could derive from Illyrian *\"Bass-an-as\"), which would derive from the Proto-Indo-European root \"bos\" or \"bogh\"—meaning \"the running water\". According to English medievalist William Miller the Slavic settlers in Bosnia \"adapted the Latin designation  Basante, to their own idiom by calling the stream Bosna and themselves Bosniaks \".

The name Herzegovina (\"herzog's \", from German word for \"duke\") originates from Bosnian magnate Stjepan Vukčić Kosača's title, \"Herceg (Herzog) of Hum and the Coast\" (1448). Hum, formerly Zahumlje, was an early medieval principality that was conquered by the Bosnian Banate in the first half of the 14th century. The region was administered by the Ottomans as the Sanjak of Herzegovina (Hersek) within the Eyalet of Bosnia up until the formation of the short-lived Herzegovina Eyalet in the 1830s, which remerged in the 1850s, after which the entity became commonly known as Bosnia and Herzegovina.

On initial proclamation of independence in 1992, the country's official name was the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina but following the 1995 Dayton Agreement and the new constitution that accompanied it the official name was changed to Bosnia and Herzegovina.

History

Early history

Mogorjelo, ancient Roman suburban Villa Rustica from the 4th century, near Čapljina

Main article: Early history of Bosnia and Herzegovina

Bosnia has been inhabited by humans since at least the Paleolithic, as one of the oldest cave paintings was found in Badanj cave. Major Neolithic cultures such as the Butmir and Kakanj were present along the river Bosna dated from c. 6230 BC – c. 4900 BC.

Ancient Illyrians

The bronze culture of the Illyrians, an ethnic group with a distinct culture and art form, started to organize itself in today's Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Kosovo, Montenegro and Albania.

Roman glass found in Bosanski Novi from the 2nd century

From 8th century BC, Illyrian tribes evolved into kingdoms. The earliest recorded kingdom in Illyria (a region in the western part of the Balkan Peninsula inhabited by the Illyrians, as recorded in classical antiquity) was the Enchele in the 8th century BC. The era in which we observe other Illyrian kingdoms begins approximately at 400 BC and ends at 167 BC. The Autariatae under Pleurias (337 BC) were considered to have been a kingdom. The Kingdom of the Ardiaei (originally a tribe from the Neretva valley region) began at 230 BC and ended at 167 BC. The most notable Illyrian kingdoms and dynasties were those of Bardyllis of the Dardani and of Agron of the Ardiaei who created the last and best-known Illyrian kingdom. Agron ruled over the Ardiaei and had extended his rule to other tribes as well.

From the 7th century BC, bronze was replaced by iron, after which only jewelry and art objects were still made out of bronze. Illyrian tribes, under the influence of Hallstatt cultures to the north, formed regional centers that were slightly different. Parts of Central Bosnia were inhabited by Daesitiates tribe most commonly associated with Central Bosnian cultural group. Iron Age Glasinac culture is associated with Autariatae tribe.

A very important role in their life was the cult of the dead, which is seen in their careful burials and burial ceremonies, as well as the richness of their burial sites. In northern parts, there was a long tradition of cremation and burial in shallow graves, while in the south the dead were buried in large stone or earth tumuli (natively called gromile) that in Herzegovina were reaching monumental sizes, more than 50 m wide and 5 m high. Japodian tribes had an affinity to decoration (heavy, oversized necklaces out of yellow, blue or white glass paste, and large bronze fibulas, as well as spiral bracelets, diadems and helmets out of bronze foil).

In the 4th century BC, the first invasion of Celts is recorded. They brought the technique of the pottery wheel, new types of fibulas and different bronze and iron belts. They only passed on their way to Greece, so their influence in Bosnia and Herzegovina is negligible. Celtic migrations displaced many Illyrian tribes from their former lands, but some Celtic and Illyrian tribes mixed. Concrete historical evidence for this period is scarce, but overall it appears the region was populated by a number of different peoples speaking distinct languages.

In the Neretva Delta in the south, there were important Hellenistic influence of the Illyrian Daors tribe. Their capital was Daorson in Ošanići near Stolac. Daorson in the 4th century BC was surrounded by megalithic, 5 m high stonewalls (as large as those of Mycenae in Greece), composed of large trapezoid stone blocks. Daors made unique bronze coins and sculptures.

Conflict between the Illyrians and Romans started in 229 BC, but Rome did not complete its annexation of the region until AD 9. It was precisely in modern-day Bosnia and Herzegovina that Rome fought one of the most difficult battles in its history since the Punic Wars, as described by the Roman historian Suetonius. This was the Roman campaign against Illyricum, known as Bellum Batonianum. The conflict arose after an attempt to recruit Illyrians, and a revolt spanned for four years (6–9 AD), after which they were subdued. In the Roman period, Latin-speaking settlers from the entire Roman Empire settled among the Illyrians, and Roman soldiers were encouraged to retire in the region.

Following the split of the Empire between 337 and 395 AD, Dalmatia and Pannonia became parts of the Western Roman Empire. The region was conquered by the Ostrogoths in 455 AD. It subsequently changed hands between the Alans and the Huns. By the 6th century, Emperor Justinian had reconquered the area for the Byzantine Empire. Slavs overwhelmed the Balkans in the 6th and 7th centuries. Illyrian cultural traits were adopted by the South Slavs, as evidenced in certain customs and traditions, placenames, etc.
Timothy Gregory explains:

It is now generally agreed that the people who lived in the Balkans after the Slavic \"invasions\" were probably for the most part the same as those who had lived there earlier, although the creation of new political groups and arrival of small numbers of immigrants caused people to look at themselves as distinct from their neighbours, including the Byzantines.

Gregory, Timothy E. (2010). A History of Byzantium (2 ed.). Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell. p. 169.

Middle Ages

 Main article: Bosnia and Herzegovina in the Middle Ages

Hval's Codex, illustrated Slavic manuscript from medieval Bosnia.

The Early Slavs raided the Western Balkans, including Bosnia, in the 6th and early 7th century (amid the Migration Period), and were composed of small tribal units drawn from a single Slavic confederation known to the Byzantines as the Sclaveni (whilst the related Antes, roughly speaking, colonized the eastern portions of the Balkans).
Tribes recorded by the ethnonyms of \"Serb\" and \"Croat\" are described as a second, latter, migration of different people during the second quarter of the 7th century who do not seem to have been particularly numerous; these early \"Serb\" and \"Croat\" tribes, whose exact identity is subject to scholarly debate, came to predominate over the Slavs in the neighbouring regions. The bulk of Bosnia proper, however, appears to have been a territory between Serb and Croat rule and is not enumerated as one of the regions settled by those tribes.

Bosnia is first mentioned as a land (horion Bosona) in Byzantine Emperor Constantine Porphyrogenitus' De Administrando Imperio in the mid 10th century, at the end of a chapter (Chap. 32) entitled Of the Serbs and the country in which they now dwell. This has been scholarly interpreted in several ways and used especially by the Serb national ideologists to prove Bosnia as originally a \"Serb\" land. Other scholars have asserted the inclusion of Bosnia into Chapter 32 to merely be the result of Serbian Grand Duke Časlav's temporary rule over Bosnia at the time, while also pointing out Porphyrogenitus does not say anywhere explicitly that Bosnia is a \"Serb land\". In fact, the very translation of the critical sentence where the word Bosona (Bosnia) appears is subject to varying interpretation.

In time, Bosnia formed a unit under its own ruler, who called himself Bosnian. Bosnia, along with other territories, became part of Duklja in the 11th century, although it retained its own nobility and institutions.

Bosnia in the Middle Ages spanning the Banate of Bosnia and the succeeding Kingdom of Bosnia.

In the High Middle Ages political circumstance led to the area being contested between the Kingdom of Hungary and the Byzantine Empire. Following another shift of power between the two in the early 12th century, Bosnia found itself outside the control of both and emerged as the Banate of Bosnia (under the rule of local bans). The first Bosnian ban known by name was Ban Borić. The second was Ban Kulin whose rule marked the start of a controversy involving the Bosnian Church – considered heretical by the Roman Catholic Church. In response to Hungarian attempts to use church politics regarding the issue as a way to reclaim sovereignty over Bosnia, Kulin held a council of local church leaders to renounce the heresy and embraced Catholicism in 1203. Despite this, Hungarian ambitions remained unchanged long after Kulin's death in 1204, waning only after an unsuccessful invasion in 1254. During this time the population was called Dobri Bošnjani (\"Good Bosnians\"). The names Serb and Croat, though occasionally appearing in peripheral areas, were not used in Bosnia proper.

Bosnian history from then until the early 14th century was marked by a power struggle between the Šubić and Kotromanić families. This conflict came to an end in 1322, when Stephen II Kotromanić became Ban. By the time of his death in 1353, he was successful in annexing territories to the north and west, as well as Zahumlje and parts of Dalmatia. He was succeeded by his ambitious nephew Tvrtko who, following a prolonged struggle with nobility and inter-family strife, gained full control of the country in 1367. By the year 1377, Bosnia was elevated into a kingdom with the coronation of Tvrtko as the first Bosnian King in Mile near Visoko in the Bosnian heartland.

Following his death in 1391 however, Bosnia fell into a long period of decline. The Ottoman Empire had started its conquest of Europe and posed a major threat to the Balkans throughout the first half of the 15th century. Finally, after decades of political and social instability, the Kingdom of Bosnia ceased to exist in 1463 after its conquest by the Ottoman Empire.

Ottoman Bosnia (1463–1878)

Main articles: Ottoman conquest of Bosnia and Ottoman Bosnia

Gazi Husrev-beg Mosque in Sarajevo dating from 1531

The Ottoman conquest of Bosnia marked a new era in the country's history and introduced drastic changes in the political and cultural landscape. The Ottomans incorporating Bosnia as an integral province of the Ottoman Empire with its historical name and territorial integrity.

Within Bosnia the Ottomans introduced a number of key changes in the territory's socio-political administration; including a new landholding system, a reorganization of administrative units, and a complex system of social differentiation by class and religious affiliation.

The four centuries of Ottoman rule also had a drastic impact on Bosnia's population make-up, which changed several times as a result of the empire's conquests, frequent wars with European powers, forced and economic migrations, and epidemics. A native Slavic-speaking Muslim community emerged and eventually became the largest of the ethno-religious groups due to lack of strong Christian church organizations and continuous rivalry between the Orthodox and Catholic churches, while the indigenous Bosnian Church disappeared altogether (ostensibly by conversion of its members to Islam). The Ottomans referred to them as kristianlar while the Orthodox and Catholics were called gebir or kafir, meaning \"unbeliever\". The Bosnian Franciscans (and the Catholic population as a whole) were protected by official imperial decrees and in accordance and full extent of Ottoman laws, however in effect, these often merely affected arbitrary rule and behavior of powerful local elite.

As the Ottoman Empire continued their rule in the Balkans (Rumelia), Bosnia was somewhat relieved of the pressures of being a frontier province, and experienced a period of general welfare. A number of cities, such as Sarajevo and Mostar, were established and grew into regional centers of trade and urban culture and were then visited by Ottoman traveler Evliya Çelebi in 1648. Within these cities, various Ottoman Sultans financed the construction of many works of Bosnian architecture such as the country's first library in Sarajevo, madrassas, a school of Sufi philosophy, and a clock tower (Sahat Kula), bridges such as the Stari Most, the Tsar's Mosque and the Gazi Husrev-beg's Mosque.

Furthermore, several Bosnian Muslims played influential roles in the Ottoman Empire's cultural and political history during this time. Bosnian recruits formed a large component of the Ottoman ranks in the battles of Mohács and Krbava field, while numerous other Bosnians rose through the ranks of the Ottoman military to occupy the highest positions of power in the Empire, including admirals such as Matrakçı Nasuh; generals such as Isa-Beg Isaković, Gazi Husrev-beg and Hasan Predojević and Sarı Süleyman Paşa; administrators such as Ferhat-paša Sokolović and Osman Gradaščević; and Grand Viziers such as the influential Mehmed Paša Sokolović and Damad Ibrahim Pasha. Some Bosnians emerged as Sufi mystics, scholars such as Muhamed Hevaji Uskufi Bosnevi, Ali Džabič; and poets in the Turkish, Albanian, Arabic, and Persian languages.

Austro-Hungarian troops enter Sarajevo, 1878

However, by the late 17th century the Empire's military misfortunes caught up with the country, and the end of the Great Turkish War with the treaty of Karlowitz in 1699 again made Bosnia the Empire's westernmost province. The 18th century was marked by further military failures, numerous revolts within Bosnia, and several outbursts of plague.

The Porte's efforts at modernizing the Ottoman state were met with distrust growing to hostility in Bosnia, where local aristocrats stood to lose much through the proposed Tanzimat reforms. This, combined with frustrations over territorial, political concessions in the north-east, and the plight of Slavic Muslim refugees arriving from the Sanjak of Smederevo into Bosnia Eyalet, culminated in a partially unsuccessful revolt by Husein Gradaščević, who endorsed a Bosnia Eyalet autonomous from the authoritarian rule of the Ottoman Sultan Mahmud II, who persecuted, executed and abolished the Janissaries and reduced the role of autonomous Pashas in Rumelia. Mahmud II sent his Grand Vizier to subdue Bosnia Eyalet and succeeded only with the reluctant assistance of Ali-paša Rizvanbegović. Related rebellions were extinguished by 1850, but the situation continued to deteriorate.

New nationalist movements appeared in Bosnia by the middle of the 19th century. Bolstered by Serbia's breakaway from the Ottoman Empire in the early 19th century, Serbian nationalists began making contacts and sending nationalist propaganda claiming Bosnia as a Serbian province. In the neighboring Habsburg Empire across the Ottoman border, Croatian nationalists made similar claims about Bosnia as a Croatian province. The rise of these competing movements marked the beginning of nationalist politics in Bosnia, which continued to grow in the rest of the 19th and 20th centuries.

Agrarian unrest eventually sparked the Herzegovinian rebellion, a widespread peasant uprising, in 1875. The conflict rapidly spread and came to involve several Balkan states and Great Powers, a situation that led to the Congress of Berlin and the Treaty of Berlin in 1878.

Austro-Hungarian rule (1878–1918)

Main article: History of Bosnia and Herzegovina (1878–1918)

At the Congress of Berlin in 1878, the Austro-Hungarian Foreign Minister Gyula Andrássy obtained the occupation and administration of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and he also obtained the right to station garrisons in the Sanjak of Novi Pazar, which would remain under Ottoman administration until 1908, when the Austro-Hungarian troops withdrew from the Sanjak.

Although Austro-Hungarian officials quickly came to an agreement with Bosnians, tensions remained and a mass emigration of Bosnians occurred. However, a state of relative stability was reached soon enough and Austro-Hungarian authorities were able to embark on a number of social and administrative reforms they intended would make Bosnia and Herzegovina into a \"model\" colony.

Habsburg rule had several key concerns in Bosnia. It tried to dissipate the South Slav nationalism by disputing the earlier Serb and Croat claims to Bosnia and encouraging identification of Bosnian or Bosniak identity. Habsburg rule also tried to provide for modernisation by codifying laws, introducing new political institutions, and establishing and expanding industries.

Austria–Hungary began to plan annexation of Bosnia, but due to international disputes the issue was not resolved until the annexation crisis of 1908. Several external matters affected status of Bosnia and its relationship with Austria–Hungary. A bloody coup occurred in Serbia in 1903, which brought a radical anti-Austrian government into power in Belgrade. Then in 1908, the revolt in the Ottoman Empire raised concerns the Istanbul government might seek the outright return of Bosnia-Herzegovina. These factors caused the Austro-Hungarian government to seek a permanent resolution of the Bosnian question sooner, rather than later.

National Museum of Bosnia and Herzegovina was established in 1888

Taking advantage of turmoil in the Ottoman Empire, Austro-Hungarian diplomacy tried to obtain provisional Russian approval for changes over the status of Bosnia Herzegovina and published the annexation proclamation on 6 October 1908. Despite international objections to the Austro-Hungarian annexation, Russians and their client state, Serbia, were compelled to accept the Austrian-Hungarian annexation of Bosnia Herzegovina in March 1909.

In 1910, Habsburg Emperor Franz Joseph proclaimed the first constitution in Bosnia, which led to relaxation of earlier laws, elections and formation of the Bosnian parliament, and growth of new political life.

Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria and Sophie, Duchess of Hohenberg in Sarajevo, illustrated in the Italian newspaper Domenica del Corriere, 12 July 1914 by Achille Beltrame

On 28 June 1914, a Yugoslav nationalist youth named Gavrilo Princip, a member of the secret Serbian-supported movement, Young Bosnia, assassinated the heir to the Austro-Hungarian throne, Archduke Franz Ferdinand, in Sarajevo—an event that was the spark that set off World War I. At the end of the war, the Bosniaks had lost more men per capita than any other ethnic group in the Habsburg Empire whilst serving in the Bosnian-Herzegovinian Infantry (known as Bosniaken) of the Austro-Hungarian Army. Nonetheless, Bosnia and Herzegovina as a whole managed to escape the conflict relatively unscathed.

The Austro-Hungarian authorities established an auxiliary militia known as the Schutzkorps with a moot role in the empire's policy of anti-Serb repression. Schutzkorps, predominantly recruited among the Muslim (Bosniak) population, were tasked with hunting down rebel Serbs (the Chetniks and Komiti) and became known for their persecution of Serbs particularly in Serb populated areas of eastern Bosnia, where they partly retaliated against Serbian Chetniks who in fall 1914 had carried out attacks against the Muslim population in the area. The proceedings of the Austro-Hungarian authorities led to around 5,500 citizens of Serb ethnicity in Bosnia and Herzegovina being arrested, and between 700 and 2,200 died in prison while 460 were executed. Around 5,200 Serb families were forcibly expelled from Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Kingdom of Yugoslavia (1918–1941)

Main article: History of Bosnia and Herzegovina (1918–1941)

Following World War I, Bosnia and Herzegovina joined the South Slav Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (soon renamed Yugoslavia). Political life in Bosnia at this time was marked by two major trends: social and economic unrest over property redistribution, and formation of several political parties that frequently changed coalitions and alliances with parties in other Yugoslav regions.

The dominant ideological conflict of the Yugoslav state, between Croatian regionalism and Serbian centralization, was approached differently by Bosnia's major ethnic groups and was dependent on the overall political atmosphere. The political reforms brought about in the newly established Yugoslavian kingdom saw few benefits for the Bosniaks; according to the 1910 final census of land ownership and population according to religious affiliation conducted in Austro-Hungary, Muslims (Bosniaks) owned 91.1%, Orthodox Serbians owned 6.0%, Croatian Catholics owned 2.6% and others, 0.3% of the property. Following the reforms Bosnian Muslims were dispossessed of a total of 1,175,305 hectares of agricultural and forest land.

Although the initial split of the country into 33 oblasts erased the presence of traditional geographic entities from the map, the efforts of Bosnian politicians such as Mehmed Spaho ensured the six oblasts carved up from Bosnia and Herzegovina corresponded to the six sanjaks from Ottoman times and, thus, matched the country's traditional boundary as a whole.

The establishment of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia in 1929, however, brought the redrawing of administrative regions into banates or banovinas that purposely avoided all historical and ethnic lines, removing any trace of a Bosnian entity. Serbo-Croat tensions over the structuring of the Yugoslav state continued, with the concept of a separate Bosnian division receiving little or no consideration.

The Cvetković-Maček Agreement that created the Croatian banate in 1939 encouraged what was essentially a partition of Bosnia between Croatia and Serbia. However the rising threat of Adolf Hitler's Nazi Germany forced Yugoslav politicians to shift their attention. Following a period that saw attempts at appeasement, the signing of the Tripartite Treaty, and a coup d'état, Yugoslavia was finally invaded by Germany on 6 April 1941.

World War II (1941–45)

Main article: History of Bosnia and Herzegovina (1941–1945)

The railway bridge over the Neretva river in Jablanica, twice destroyed during the Battle of the Neretva

Once the kingdom of Yugoslavia was conquered by German forces in World War II, all of Bosnia was ceded to the Nazi puppet regime, the Independent State of Croatia (NDH). The NDH leaders embarked on a campaign of extermination of Serbs, Jews, Romani as well as dissident Croats, and, later, Josip Broz Tito's Partisans by setting up a number of death camps.

An estimated 209,000 Serbs and Montenegrins were killed on the territory of Bosnia–Herzegovina during the war. The Ustaše recognized both Roman Catholicism and Islam as the national religions, but held the position Eastern Orthodoxy, as a symbol of Serbian identity, was their greatest foe. Although Croats were by far the largest ethnic group to constitute the Ustaše, the Vice President of the NDH and leader of the Yugoslav Muslim Organization Džafer Kulenović was a Muslim, and Muslims (Bosniaks) in total constituted nearly 12% of the Ustaše military and civil service authority.

Many Serbs themselves took up arms and joined the Chetniks, a Serb nationalist movement with the aim of establishing an ethnically homogeneous 'Greater Serbian' state within the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. The Chetniks, in turn, persecuted and killed a large number of non-Serbs, communist Serbs and Communist sympathizers, with the Muslim population of Bosnia, Herzegovina and Sandžak being a primary target. Once captured, Muslim villagers were systematically massacred by the Chetniks. Of the 75,000 Muslims who lost their lives in Bosnia and Herzegovina during the war, approximately 30,000 (mostly civilians) were killed by the Chetniks.

A percentage of Muslims served in Nazi Waffen-SS units. Between 64,000 and 79,000 Bosnian Croats were killed between April 1941 to May 1945. Of these, about 18,000 were killed by the Chetniks.

Eternal flame memorial to the military and civilian World War II victims

On 12 October 1941, a group of 108 prominent Sarajevan Muslims signed the Resolution of Sarajevo Muslims by which they condemned the persecution of Serbs organized by the Ustaše, made distinction between Muslims who participated in such persecutions and the Muslim population as a whole, presented information about the persecutions of Muslims by Serbs, and requested security for all citizens of the country, regardless of their identity.

Starting in 1941, Yugoslav communists under the leadership of Josip Broz Tito organized their own multi-ethnic resistance group, the partisans, who fought against both Axis and Chetnik forces. On 29 November 1943 the Anti-Fascist Council of National Liberation of Yugoslavia with Tito at its helm held a founding conference in Jajce where Bosnia and Herzegovina was reestablished as a republic within the Yugoslavian federation in its Habsburg borders.

Military success eventually prompted the Allies to support the Partisans, resulting in the successful Maclean Mission, but Tito declined their offer to help and relied on his own forces instead. All the major military offensives by the antifascist movement of Yugoslavia against Nazis and their local supporters were conducted in Bosnia–Herzegovina and its peoples bore the brunt of fighting. More than 300,000 people died in Bosnia and Herzegovina in World War II. At the end of the war the establishment of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, with the constitution of 1946, officially made Bosnia and Herzegovina one of six constituent republics in the new state.

Socialist Federative Republic of Yugoslavia (1945–1992)

Main article: History of Bosnia and Herzegovina (1945–1992)

See also: Socialist Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina

Bosnia and Herzegovina's flag while in the Socialist Federative Republic of Yugoslavia

Due to its central geographic position within the Yugoslavian federation, post-war Bosnia was selected as a base for the development of the military defense industry. This contributed to a large concentration of arms and military personnel in Bosnia; a significant factor in the war that followed the break-up of Yugoslavia in the 1990s. However, Bosnia's existence within Yugoslavia, for the large part, was relatively peaceful and very prosperous, with high employment, a strong industrial and export oriented economy, a good education system and social and medical security for every citizen (of Bosnia and Herzegovina). Several international corporations operated in Bosnia — Volkswagen as part of TAS (car factory in Sarajevo, from 1972), Coca-Cola (from 1975), SKF Sweden (from 1967), Marlboro, (a tobacco factory in Sarajevo), and Holiday Inn hotels. Sarajevo was the site of the 1984 Winter Olympics.

During the 1950s and 1960s Bosnia was a political backwater of the Republic of Yugoslavia. In the 1970s a strong Bosnian political elite arose, fueled in part by Tito's leadership in the Non-Aligned Movement and Bosnians serving in Yugoslavia's diplomatic corps. While working within the Socialist system, politicians such as Džemal Bijedić, Branko Mikulić and Hamdija Pozderac reinforced and protected the sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Their efforts proved key during the turbulent period following Tito's death in 1980, and are today considered some of the early steps towards Bosnian independence. However, the republic did not escape the increasingly nationalistic climate of the time. With the fall of communism and the start of the break-up of Yugoslavia, doctrine of tolerance began to lose its potency, creating an opportunity for nationalist elements in the society to spread their influence.

Bosnian War (1992–1995)

Main article: Bosnian War

See also: Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina

Dissolution process of Yugoslavia

On 18 November 1990, multi-party parliamentary elections were held throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. A second round followed on 25 November, resulting in a national assembly where communist power was replaced by a coalition of three ethnically-based parties. Following Slovenia and Croatia's declarations of independence from Yugoslavia, a significant split developed among the residents of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the issue of whether to remain within Yugoslavia (overwhelmingly favored by Serbs) or seek independence (overwhelmingly favored by Bosniaks and Croats).

The Serb members of parliament, consisting mainly of the Serb Democratic Party members, abandoned the central parliament in Sarajevo, and formed the Assembly of the Serb People of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 24 October 1991, which marked the end of the tri-ethnic coalition that governed after the elections in 1990. This Assembly established the Serbian Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina in part of the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 9 January 1992. It was renamed Republika Srpska in August 1992. On 18 November 1991, the party branch in Bosnia and Herzegovina of the ruling party in the Republic of Croatia, the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ), proclaimed the existence of the Croatian Community of Herzeg-Bosnia in a separate part of the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina with the Croatian Defence Council (HVO) as its military branch. It went unrecognized by the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which declared it illegal.

The Parliament of Bosnia and Herzegovina burns after being struck by tank fire during the Siege of Sarajevo, 1992

A declaration of the sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 15 October 1991 was followed by a referendum for independence on 29 February/1 March 1992, which was boycotted by the great majority of Serbs. The turnout in the independence referendum was 63.4 percent and 99.7 percent of voters voted for independence. Bosnia and Herzegovina declared independence on 3 March 1992 and received international recognition the following month on 6 April 1992. The Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina was subsequently admitted as a member state of the United Nations on 22 May 1992. Serbian leader Slobodan Milošević and Croatian leader Franjo Tuđman are believed to have agreed on a partition of Bosnia and Herzegovina in March 1991, with the aim of establishing Greater Serbia and Greater Croatia.

Following Bosnia and Herzegovina's declaration of independence, Bosnian Serb militias mobilized in different parts of the country. Government forces were poorly equipped and unprepared for the war. International recognition of Bosnia and Herzegovina increased diplomatic pressure for the Yugoslav People's Army (JNA) to withdraw from the republic's territory, which they officially did in June 1992. The Bosnian Serb members of the JNA simply changed insignia, formed the Army of Republika Srpska (VRS), and continued fighting. Armed and equipped from JNA stockpiles in Bosnia, supported by volunteers and various paramilitary forces from Serbia, and receiving extensive humanitarian, logistical and financial support from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Republika Srpska's offensives in 1992 managed to place much of the country under its control. The Bosnian Serb advance was accompanied by the ethnic cleansing of Bosniaks and Bosnian Croats from VRS-controlled areas. Dozens of concentration camps were established in which inmates were subjected to violence and abuse, including rape. The ethnic cleansing culminated in the Srebrenica massacre of more than 8,000 Bosniak men and boys in July 1995, which was ruled to have been a genocide by the ICTY. Bosniak and Bosnian Croat forces also committed war crimes against civilians from different ethnic groups, though on a smaller scale. Most of the Bosniak and Croat atrocities were committed during the Bosniak-Croat war, a sub-conflict of the Bosnian War that pitted the Army of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (ARBiH) against the HVO. The Bosniak-Croat conflict ended in March 1994, with the signing of the Washington Agreement, leading to the creation of a joint Bosniak-Croat Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which amalgamated HVO-held territory with that held by the ARBiH.

Bosnia and Herzegovina after the Dayton Agreement

Following the Srebrenica massacre, NATO launched a bombing campaign against Republika Srpska in August 1995. The bombing, together with a joint HV/HVO/ARBiH ground offensive in western Bosnia, convinced the Bosnian Serb leadership to consider a negotiated settlement, which manifested itself in the Dayton Agreement of December 1995. It brought an end to active combat and roughly established the basic political structure of the present-day state. A NATO-led peacekeeping force was immediately dispatched to the country to enforce the agreement. An estimated 100,000 people were killed in the war, about two-thirds of whom were Bosniak. An additional 2.2 million citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina of all ethnicities were displaced. The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) has ruled the conflict involved the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (subsequently Serbia and Montenegro), as well as Croatia. Dozens of Bosnian Serb officials and soldiers have been convicted for their role in war crimes and crimes against humanity during the conflict, as well as for the genocide in Srebrenica. Several high-ranking Croat and Bosniak officials have also been convicted. Victims' remains continue to be unearthed. After the war, the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina brought a lawsuit against Serbia before the International Court of Justice (ICJ), accusing the country of genocide. In 2007, the ICJ exonerated Serbia of direct responsibility for the genocide committed by Bosnian Serb forces in Srebrenica, but concluded the country had not done enough to prevent the massacre.

Protests in 2014

Main article: 2014 riots in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Tuzla government building burning after anti-government clashes on 7 February 2014

On 4 February 2014, the protests against the government of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, one of the country's two entities, dubbed the Bosnian Spring, the name being taken from the Arab Spring, began in the northern town of Tuzla. Workers from several factories that had been privatised and had gone bankrupt united to demand action over jobs, and unpaid salaries and pensions. Soon protests spread to the rest of the Federation, with violent clashes reported in close to 20 towns, the biggest of which were Sarajevo, Zenica, Mostar, Bihać, Brčko and Tuzla. The Bosnian news media reported hundreds of people had been injured during the protests, including dozens of police officers, with bursts of violence in Sarajevo, in the northern city of Tuzla, in Mostar in the south, and in Zenica in central Bosnia. The same level of unrest or activism did not occur in the Republika Srpska, but hundreds of people also gathered in support of protests in the town of Banja Luka against its separate government.

The protests marked the largest outbreak of public anger over high unemployment and two decades of political inertia in the country since the end of the Bosnian War in 1995.

Geography

 Main article: Geography of Bosnia and Herzegovina

See also: List of mountains in Bosnia and Herzegovina, List of lakes in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and List of rivers of Bosnia and Herzegovina

Bosnia is in the western Balkans, bordering Croatia (932 km or 579 mi) to the north and west, Serbia (302 km or 188 mi) to the east, and Montenegro (225 km or 140 mi) to the southeast. It has a coastline about 20 kilometres (12 miles) long surrounding the city of Neum. It lies between latitudes 42° and 46° N, and longitudes 15° and 20° E.

The country's name comes from the two alleged regions Bosnia and Herzegovina whose border was never defined. Historically, Bosnia's official name never included any of its many regions until the Austria-Hungarian occupation.

Topographic map of Bosnia and Herzegovina

Bosna river, Ilidža

The country is mostly mountainous, encompassing the central Dinaric Alps. The northeastern parts reach into the Pannonian Plain, while in the south it borders the Adriatic. The Dinaric Alps generally run in a southeast–northwest direction, and get higher towards the south. The highest point of the country is the peak of Maglić at 2,386 metres (7,828.1 feet), on the Montenegrin border. Major mountains include Kozara, Grmeč, Vlašić, Čvrsnica, Prenj, Romanija, Jahorina, Bjelašnica and Treskavica. The geological composition of the Dinaric chain of mountains in Bosnia consists primarily of limestone (including Mesozoic limestone), with deposits of iron, coal, zinc, manganese, bauxite, lead, and salt present in some areas, especially in central and northern Bosnia.

Overall, nearly 50% of Bosnia and Herzegovina is forested. Most forest areas are in the centre, east and west parts of Bosnia. Herzegovina has drier Mediterranean climate, with dominant karst topography. Northern Bosnia (Posavina) contains very fertile agricultural land along the River Sava and the corresponding area is heavily farmed. This farmland is a part of the Pannonian Plain stretching into neighboring Croatia and Serbia. The country has only 20 kilometres (12 miles) of coastline, around the town of Neum in the Herzegovina-Neretva Canton. Although the city is surrounded by Croatian peninsulas, by international law, Bosnia and Herzegovina has a right of passage to the outer sea.

Sarajevo is the capital and largest city. Other major cities are Banja Luka and Bihać in the northwest region known as Bosanska Krajina, Bijeljina and Tuzla in the northeast, Zenica in the central part of Bosnia and Mostar, the largest city in Herzegovina.

There are seven major rivers in Bosnia and Herzegovina:

Maglić Mts. (from Trnovačko lake in Montenegro)

The Sava is the largest river of the country, and forms its northern natural border with Croatia. It drains 76% of the country's territory into the Danube and then the Black Sea. Bosnia and Herzegovina is a member of the International Commission for the Protection of the Danube River (ICPDR).

The Una, Sana and Vrbas are right tributaries of Sava river. They are in the northwestern region of Bosanska Krajina.

The Bosna river gave its name to the country, and is the longest river fully contained within it. It stretches through central Bosnia, from its source near Sarajevo to Sava in the north.

The Drina flows through the eastern part of Bosnia, and for the most part it forms a natural border with Serbia.

The Neretva is the major river of Herzegovina and the only major river that flows south, into the Adriatic Sea.

Phytogeographically, Bosnia and Herzegovina belongs to the Boreal Kingdom and is shared between the Illyrian province of the Circumboreal Region and Adriatic province of the Mediterranean Region. According to the World Wide Fund for Nature, the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina can be subdivided into three ecoregions: the Pannonian mixed forests, Dinaric Mountains mixed forests and Illyrian deciduous forests.

Panoramic view towards Neum, Bosnia and Herzegovina's 20 km (12 mi) of coastline access to the Adriatic Sea

Government

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Main articles: Politics of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Political divisions of Bosnia and Herzegovina

Bosnia and Herzegovina consists of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH); Republika Srpska (RS); and Brčko District (BD).

As a result of the Dayton Accords, the civilian peace implementation is supervised by the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina selected by the Peace Implementation Council. The High Representative is the highest political authority in the country. The High Representative has many governmental and legislative powers, including the dismissal of elected and non-elected officials. Due to the vast powers of the High Representative over Bosnian politics and essential veto powers, the position has also been compared to that of a viceroy.

Politics take place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democracy, whereby executive power is exercised by the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Legislative power is vested in both the Council of Ministers and the Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Members of the Parliamentary Assembly are chosen according to a proportional representation system.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is a liberal democracy. It has several levels of political structuring, according to the Dayton Accords. The most important of these levels is the division of the country into two entities: the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Republika Srpska. The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina covers 51% of Bosnia and Herzegovina's total area, while Republika Srpska covers 49%. The entities, based largely on the territories held by the two warring sides at the time, were formally established by the Dayton peace agreement in 1995 because of the tremendous changes in Bosnia and Herzegovina's ethnic structure. Since 1996, the power of the entities relative to the State government has decreased significantly. Nonetheless, entities still have numerous powers to themselves.

The Brčko District in the north of the country was created in 2000, out of land from both entities. It officially belongs to both, but is governed by neither, and functions under a decentralized system of local government. For election purposes, Brčko District voters can choose to participate in either the Federation or Republika Srpska elections. The Brčko District has been praised for maintaining a multiethnic population and a level of prosperity significantly above the national average.

Bosnia and Herzegovina's government building in Sarajevo

The Presidency Building in central Sarajevo

The third level of Bosnia and Herzegovina's political subdivision is manifested in cantons. They are unique to the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina entity, which consists of ten of them. Each has a cantonal government, which is under the law of the Federation as a whole. Some cantons are ethnically mixed and have special laws to ensure the equality of all constituent people.

The fourth level of political division in Bosnia and Herzegovina is the municipality. The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina is divided into 74 municipalities, and Republika Srpska into 63. Municipalities also have their own local government, and are typically based on the most significant city or place in their territory. As such, many municipalities have a long tradition and history with their present boundaries. Some others, however, were only created following the recent war after traditional municipalities were split by the Inter-Entity Boundary Line. Each canton in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina consists of several municipalities, which are divided into local communities.

Besides entities, cantons, and municipalities, Bosnia and Herzegovina also has four \"official\" cities. These are: Banja Luka, Mostar, Sarajevo, and East Sarajevo. The territory and government of the cities of Banja Luka and Mostar corresponds to the municipalities of the same name, while the cities of Sarajevo and East Sarajevo officially consist of several municipalities. Cities have their own city government whose power is in between that of the municipalities and cantons (or the entity, in the case of Republika Srpska).

More recently, several central institutions have been established (such as defense ministry, security ministry, state court, indirect taxation service and so on) in the process of transferring part of the jurisdiction from the entities to the state. The representation of the government of Bosnia and Herzegovina is by elites who represent the country's three major groups, with each having a guaranteed share of power.

The Chair of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina rotates among three members (Bosniak, Serb, Croat), each elected as the Chair for an eight-month term within their four-year term as a member. The three members of the Presidency are elected directly by the people with Federation voters voting for the Bosniak and the Croat, and the Republika Srpska voters for the Serb.

The Chair of the Council of Ministers is nominated by the Presidency and approved by the House of Representatives. He or she is then responsible for appointing a Foreign Minister, Minister of Foreign Trade, and others as appropriate.

The Parliamentary Assembly is the lawmaking body in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It consists of two houses: the House of Peoples and the House of Representatives. The House of Peoples has 15 delegates chosen by parliaments of the entities, two-thirds of which come from the Federation (5 Croat and 5 Bosniaks) and one-third from the Republika Srpska (5 Serbs). The House of Representatives is composed of 42 Members elected by the people under a form of proportional representation (PR), two-thirds elected from the Federation and one-third elected from the Republika Srpska.

The Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina is the supreme, final arbiter of legal matters. It is composed of nine members: four members are selected by the House of Representatives of the Federation, two by the Assembly of the Republika Srpska, and three by the President of the European Court of Human Rights after consultation with the Presidency, but cannot be Bosnian citizens.

However, the highest political authority in the country is the High Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the chief executive officer for the international civilian presence in the country and is selected by the European Union. Since 1995, the High Representative has been able to bypass the elected parliamentary assembly, and since 1997 has been able to remove elected officials. The methods selected by the High Representative have been criticized as undemocratic. International supervision is to end when the country is deemed politically and democratically stable and self-sustaining.

Military

This section relies largely or entirely on a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources.

Find sources: \"Bosnia and Herzegovina\" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (March 2018)

The Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina (OSBiH) were unified into a single entity in 2005, with the merger of the Army of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Army of Republika Srpska, which had defended their respective regions. The Ministry of Defense was founded in 2004.

The Bosnian military consists of the Bosnian Ground Forces and Air Force and Air Defense. The Ground Forces number 14,725 active and 7,000 reserve personnel. They are armed with a mix of American, Yugoslavian, Soviet, and European-made weaponry, vehicles, and military equipment. The Air Force and Air Defense Forces have 3,000 personnel and about 62 aircraft. The Air Defense Forces operate MANPADS hand-held missiles, surface-to-air missile (SAM) batteries, anti-aircraft cannons, and radar. The Army has recently adopted remodeled MARPAT uniforms, used by Bosnian soldiers serving with ISAF in Afghanistan. A domestic production program is now underway to ensure that army units are equipped with the correct ammunition.

Beginning in 2007, the Ministry of Defence of Bosnia and Herzegovina undertook the army's first ever international assistance mission, enlisting the military to serve with ISAF peace missions to Afghanistan, Iraq and the Democratic Republic of Congo in 2007. Five officers, acting as officers/advisors, served in the Democratic Republic of Congo. 45 soldiers, mostly acting as base security and medical assistants, served in Afghanistan. 85 Bosnian soldiers served as base security in Iraq, occasionally conducting infantry patrols there as well. All three deployed groups have been commended by their respective international forces as well as the Ministry of Defence of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The international assistance operations are still ongoing.

The Air Force and Anti-Aircraft Defence Brigade of Bosnia and Herzegovina was formed when elements of the Army of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republika Srpska Air Force were merged in 2006. The Air Force has seen improvements in the last few years with added funds for aircraft repairs and improved cooperation with the Ground Forces as well as to the citizens of the country. The Ministry of Defense of Bosnia and Herzegovina is pursuing the acquisition of new aircraft including helicopters and perhaps even fighter jets.

Foreign relations

Main article: Foreign relations of Bosnia and Herzegovina

See also: Accession of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the European Union

EU integration is one of the main political objectives of Bosnia and Herzegovina; it initiated the Stabilisation and Association Process in 2007. Countries participating in the SAP have been offered the possibility to become, once they fulfill the necessary conditions, Member States of the EU. Bosnia and Herzegovina is therefore a potential candidate country for EU accession.

The implementation of the Dayton Accords of 1995 has focused the efforts of policymakers in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the international community, on regional stabilization in the countries-successors of the former Yugoslavia.

Within Bosnia and Herzegovina, relations with its neighbors of Croatia, Serbia and Montenegro have been fairly stable since the signing of the Dayton Agreement in 1995. On 23 April 2010, Bosnia and Herzegovina received the Membership Action Plan from NATO, which is the last step before full membership in the alliance. Full membership was expected in 2014 or 2015, depending on the progress of reforms. In December 2018, NATO approved a Bosnian Membership Action Plan.

Demographics

Ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina (2013)

Main articles: Demographics of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Demographic history of Bosnia and Herzegovina

According to the 1991 census, Bosnia and Herzegovina had a population of 4,369,319, while the 1996 World Bank Group census showed a decrease to 3,764,425. Large population migrations during the Yugoslav wars in the 1990s have caused demographic shifts in the country. Between 1991 and 2013, political disagreements made it impossible to organize a census. A census had been planned for 2011, and then for 2012, but was delayed until October 2013. The 2013 census found a total population of 3,791,622 people in 1.16 million households; 585,411 fewer people than the 1991 census.

Ethnic groups

Main article: Ethnic groups in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Ethnic composition in Bosnia and Herzegovina as of 2013

 Bosniaks (50.11%)

Serbs (30.78%)

Croats (15.43%)

Others (2.73%)

Bosnia and Herzegovina is home to three ethnic \"constituent peoples\", namely Bosniaks, Serbs, and Croats, plus a number of smaller groups including Jews and Roma. According to data from 2013 census published by the Agency for Statistics of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bosniaks constitute 50.11% of the population, Serbs 30.78%, Croats 15.43%, and others form 2.73%, with the remaining respondents not declaring their ethnicity or not answering. The census results are contested by the Republika Srpska statistical office and by Bosnian Serb politicians. The dispute over the census concerns the inclusion of non-permanent Bosnian residents in the figures, which Republika Srpska officials oppose. The European Union's statistics office, Eurostat, concluded in May 2016 that the census methodology used by the Bosnian statistical agency is in line with international recommendations.

Languages

Bosnia's constitution does not specify any official languages. However, academics Hilary Footitt and Michael Kelly note the Dayton Agreement states it is \"done in Bosnian, Croatian, English and Serbian\", and they describe this as the \"de facto recognition of three official languages\" at the state level. The equal status of Bosnian, Serbian and Croatian was verified by the Constitutional Court in 2000. It ruled the provisions of the Federation and Republika Srpska constitutions on language were incompatible with the state constitution, since they only recognised \"Bosniak\" and Croatian (in the case of the Federation) and Serbian (in the case of Republika Srpska) as official languages at the entity level. As a result, the wording of the entity constitutions was changed and all three languages were made official in both entities. The three standard languages are fully mutually intelligible and are known collectively under the appellation of Serbo-Croatian, despite this term not being formally recognized in the country. Use of one of the three languages has become a marker of ethnic identity. Michael Kelly and Catherine Baker argue: \"The three official languages of today's Bosnian state...represent the symbolic assertion of national identity over the pragmatism of mutual intelligibility\".

According to the 1992 European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, Bosnia and Herzegovina recognizes the following minority languages: Albanian, Montenegrin, Czech, Italian, Hungarian, Macedonian, German, Polish, Romani, Romanian, Rusyn, Slovak, Slovene, Turkish, Ukrainian and Jewish (Yiddish and Ladino). The German minority in Bosnia and Herzegovina are mostly remnants of Donauschwaben (Danube Swabians), who settled in the area after the Habsburg monarchy claimed the Balkans from the Ottoman Empire. Due to expulsions and (forced) assimilation after the two World Wars, the number of ethnic Germans in Bosnia and Herzegovina was drastically diminished.

In a 2013 census, 52.86% of the population consider their mother tongue Bosnian, 30.76% Serbian, 14.6% Croatian and 1.57% another language, with 0.21% not giving an answer.

Religion

Main article: Religion in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Religion in Bosnia and Herzegovina (2013)

religion percent

Islam

51%

Christianity

46%

-Eastern Orthodox

31%

-Catholicism

15%

Others/none/not stated

3%

As per the census of 2013, Islam is the major religion with 51% Muslims, 46% Christians and remaining others 3%. 

46% of the population identify as Christian; of these, the Serbian Orthodox Church makes up the largest group, accounting for 31% of the population (of whom most identify as Serbs), and the Roman Catholic Church 15% (of whom most identify as Croats). The smallest groups are Agnosticism 0.3%, Atheism 0.8% and other 1.15%, with the remainder not declaring their religion or not answering 1.1%. A 2012 survey found 54% of Bosnia's Muslims are non-denominational Muslims, while 38% follow Sunnism.

Cities

Sarajevo is home to 395,133 inhabitants in its urban area which comprises the City of Sarajevo as well as municipalities of Ilidža, Vogošća, Istočna Ilidža, Istočno Novo Sarajevo and Istočni Stari Grad. The metro area has a population of 555,210 and includes Sarajevo Canton, East Sarajevo and municipalities Breza, Kiseljak, Kreševo and Visoko.

v

t

e

Largest municipalities in Bosnia and Herzegovina

2013 census final results

Rank

Division
 Pop.
Rank

Division
 Pop.

Sarajevo

Banja Luka
 1 Sarajevo Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina 356,454 11 Zvornik Republika Srpska 58,856

Tuzla

Zenica

2 Banja Luka Republika Srpska 185,042 12 Živinice Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina 57,765

3 Tuzla Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina 110,979 13 Bihać Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina 56,261

4 Zenica Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina 110,663 14 Travnik Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina 53,482

5 Bijeljina Republika Srpska 107,715 15 Gradiška Republika Srpska 51,727

6 Mostar Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina 105,797 16 Gračanica Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina 45,220

7 Prijedor Republika Srpska 89,397 17 Lukavac Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina 44,520

8 Brčko Brčko District 83,516 18 Tešanj Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina 43,063

9 Doboj Republika Srpska 71,441 19 Sanski Most Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina 41,475

10 Cazin Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina 66,149 20 Velika Kladuša Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina 40,419

Economy

Main article: Economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina

See also: List of companies of Bosnia and Herzegovina

Graphical depiction of Bosnia and Herzegovina's product exports in 28 color-coded categories

The tallest building in Tuzla Canton is the Hotel Mellain.

During the Bosnian War, the economy suffered €200 billion in material damages. Bosnia and Herzegovina faces the dual-problem of rebuilding a war-torn country and introducing transitional liberal market reforms to its formerly mixed economy. One legacy of the previous era is a strong industry; under former republic president Džemal Bijedić and SFRY President Josip Broz Tito, metal industries were promoted in the republic, resulting in the development of a large share of Yugoslavia's plants; S.R. Bosnia and Herzegovina had a very strong industrial export oriented economy in the 1970s and 1980s, with large scale exports worth millions of US$.

For most of Bosnia's history, agriculture has been conducted on privately owned farms; Fresh food has traditionally been exported from the republic.

The war in the 1990s, caused a dramatic change in the Bosnian economy. GDP fell by 60% and the destruction of physical infrastructure devastated the economy. With much of the production capacity unrestored, the Bosnian economy still faces considerable difficulties. Figures show GDP and per capita income increased 10% from 2003 to 2004; this and Bosnia's shrinking national debt being negative trends, and high unemployment 38.7% and a large trade deficit remain cause for concern.

The national currency is the (Euro-pegged) Convertible Mark (KM), controlled by the currency board. Annual inflation is the lowest relative to other countries in the region at 1.9% in 2004. The international debt was $5.1 billion (as on 31 December 2014). Real GDP growth rate was 5% for 2004 according to the Bosnian Central Bank of BiH and Statistical Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has displayed positive progress in the previous years, which decisively moved its place from the lowest income equality rank of income equality rankings fourteen out of 193 nations.

According to Eurostat data, Bosnia and Herzegovina's PPS GDP per capita stood at 29 per cent of the EU average in 2010.

The International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced a loan to Bosnia worth US$500 million to be delivered by Stand-By Arrangement. This was scheduled to be approved in September 2012.

The United States Embassy in Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina produces the Country Commercial Guide – an annual report that delivers a comprehensive look at Bosnia and Herzegovina's commercial and economic environment, using economic, political, and market analysis. It can be viewed on Embassy Sarajevo's website.

By some estimates, grey economy is 25.5% of GDP.

In 2017, exports grew by 17% when compared to the previous year, totaling €5.65 billion. The total volume of foreign trade in 2017 amounted to €14.97 billion and increased by 14% compared to the previous year. Imports of goods increased by 12% and amounted to €9.32 billion. The coverage of imports by exports has increased by 3% compared to the previous year and now it is 61 percent. In 2017, Bosnia and Herzegovina mostly exported car seats, electricity, processed wood, aluminum and furniture. In the same year, it mostly imported crude oil, automobiles, motor oil, coal and briquettes.

The unemployment rate in 2017 was 20.5%, but The Vienna Institute for International Economic Studies is predicting falling unemployment rate for the next few years. In 2018, the unemployment should be 19.4% and it should further fall to 18.8% in 2019. In 2020, the unemployment rate should go down to 18.3%.

On 31 December 2017, Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina issued the report on public debt of Bosnia and Herzegovina, stating the public debt was reduced by €389.97 million, or by more than 6% when compared to 31 December 2016. By the end of 2017, public debt was €5.92 billion, which amounted to 35.6 percent of GDP.

As of 31 December 2017, there were 32,292 registered companies in the country, which together had revenues of €33.572 billion that same year.

In 2017, the country received €397.35 million in foreign direct investment, which equals to 2.5% of the GDP.

In 2017, Bosnia and Herzegovina ranked 3rd in the world in terms of the number of new jobs created by foreign investment, relative to the number of inhabitants.

In 2018, Bosnia and Herzegovina exported goods worth 11.9 billion KM (€6.07 billion), which is 7.43% higher than in the same period in 2017, while imports amounted to 19.27 billion KM (€9.83 billion), which is 5.47% higher.

The average price of new apartments sold in the country in the first 6 months of 2018 is 1,639 km (€886.31) per square meter. This represents a jump of 3.5% from the previous year.

On 30 June 2018, public debt of Bosnia and Herzegovina amounted to about €6.04 billion, of which external debt is 70.56 percent, while the internal debt is 29.4 percent of total public indebtedness. The share of public debt in gross domestic product is 34.92 percent.

In the first 7 months of 2018, 811,660 tourists visited the country, a 12.2% jump when compared to the first 7 months of 2017.

In the first 11 months of 2018, 1,378,542 tourists visited Bosnia-Herzegovina, an increase of 12.6%, and had 2,871,004 overnight hotel stays, a 13.8% increase from the previous year. Also, 71.8% of the tourists came from foreign countries.

In 2018, the total value of mergers and acquisitions in Bosnia and Herzegovina amounted to €404.6 million.

In 2018, 99.5 percent of enterprises in Bosnia and Herzegovina used computers in their business, while 99.3 percent had internet connections, according to a survey conducted by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Statistics Agency.

In 2018, Bosnia and Herzegovina received 783.4 million KM (€400.64 million) in direct foreign investment, which was equivalent to 2.3% of GDP.

In 2018, Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina made a profit of 8,430,875 km (€4,306,347).

The World Bank predicts that the economy will grow 3.4% in 2019.

Bosnia and Herzegovina was placed 83rd on the Index of Economic Freedom for 2019. The total rating for Bosnia and Herzegovina is 61.9. This position represents some progress relative to the 91st place in 2018. This result is below the regional level, but still above the global average, making Bosnia and Herzegovina a \"moderately free\" country.

On 31 January 2019, total deposits in Bosnian banks were KM 21.9 billion (€11.20 billion), which represents 61.15% of nominal GDP.

In the second quarter of 2019, the average price of new apartments sold in Bosnia and Herzegovina was 1,606 km (€821.47) per square meter.

In the first six months of 2019, exports amounted to 5.829 billion KM (€2.98 billion), which is 0.1% less than in the same period of 2018, while imports amounted to 9.779 billion KM (€5.00 billion), which is by 4.5% more than in the same period of the previous year.

In the first seven months of 2019, 906,788 tourists visited the country, a 11.7% jump from the previous year.

In the first six months of 2019, foreign direct investment amounted to 650.1 million KM (€332.34 million).

Transport

Main article: Transport in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Apron overview of Sarajevo International Airport

Train trip from Sarajevo to Mostar via Neretva River scenery

Sarajevo International Airport (IATA: SJJ, ICAO: LQSA), also known as Butmir Airport, is the main international airport in Bosnia and Herzegovina, located 3.3 NM (6.1 km; 3.8 mi) southwest of the Sarajevo main railway station in the city of Sarajevo in the suburb of Butmir.

Railway operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina are successors of the Yugoslav Railways within the country boundaries following independence from the Former Yugoslavia in 1992.

Communications

Main article: Telecommunications in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The Bosnian communications market was fully liberalised in January 2006. There are three landline telephone providers, although each one predominantly serves a partile services are provided by three operators, with nationwide services. Mobile data services are also available, including high-speed EDGE and 3G services.

Oslobođenje (Liberation), founded in 1943, is one of the country's longest running continuously circulating newspapers. There are many national publications, only some of which include the Dnevni Avaz (Daily Voice), founded in 1995, and Jutarnje Novine (Morning News) in circulation in Sarajevo. Other local periodicals include the Croatian newspaper Hrvatska riječ and the Bosnian magazine Start, as well as the weekly newspapers Slobodna Bosna (Free Bosnia) and BH Dani (BH Days). Novi Plamen, a monthly magazine, is the most left-wing publication. The international news station Al Jazeera maintains a sister channel that caters to the Balkan region, Al Jazeera Balkans, broadcasting out of and based in Sarajevo. Since 2014, the N1 platform began broadcasting as an affiliate of CNN International and has headquarters in Sarajevo, Zagreb, and Belgrade.

Additionally, the country is the most liberal in terms of freedom of the press in the region, ranking 43rd internationally.

As of December 2017, there are 3,064,072 internet users in the country or 86.77% of the entire population.

Tourism

Main article: Tourism in Bosnia and Herzegovina

See also: Sites of interest in Sarajevo

Mostar's Stari Most

Trebinje, on the banks of the Trebišnjica

Mehmed Paša Sokolović Bridge in Višegrad; UNESCO world heritage site since 2007.

According to projections by the World Tourism Organization, Bosnia and Herzegovina will have the third highest tourism growth rate in the world between 1995 and 2020.

In 2018, 1.883.772 tourists visited Bosnia-Herzegovina, an increase of 44,1%, and had 3.843.484 overnight hotel stays, a 43.5% increase from the previous year. Also, 71.2% of the tourists came from foreign countries.

In 2017, 1,307,319 tourists visited Bosnia and Herzegovina, an increase of 13.7%, and had 2,677,125 overnight hotel stays, a 12.3% increase from the previous year. 71.5% of the tourists came from foreign countries.

In 2006, when ranking the best cities in the world, Lonely Planet placed Sarajevo, the national capital and host of the 1984 Winter Olympic Games, as #43 on the list. Tourism in Sarajevo is chiefly focused on historical, religious, and cultural aspects. In 2010, Lonely Planet's \"Best in Travel\" nominated it as one of the top ten cities to visit that year. Sarajevo also won travel blog Foxnomad's \"Best City to Visit\" competition in 2012, beating more than one hundred other cities around the entire world.

Međugorje has become one of the most popular pilgrimage sites for Christians in the world and has turned into Europe's third most important religious place, where each year more than 1 million people visit. It has been estimated that 30 million pilgrims have come to Međugorje since the reputed apparitions began in 1981.

Bosnia has also become an increasingly popular skiing and Ecotourism destination. Bosnia and Herzegovina remains one of the last undiscovered natural regions of the southern area of the Alps, with vast tracts of wild and untouched nature attracting adventurers and nature lovers. National Geographic magazine named Bosnia and Herzegovina as the best mountain biking adventure destination for 2012. The central Bosnian Dinaric Alps are favored by hikers and mountaineers, containing both Mediterranean and Alpine climates. Whitewater rafting is somewhat of a national pastime, with three rivers, including the deepest river canyon in Europe, the Tara River Canyon.

Most recently, the Huffington Post named Bosnia and Herzegovina the \"9th Greatest Adventure in the World for 2013\", adding that the country boasts \"the cleanest water and air in Europe; the greatest untouched forests; and the most wildlife. The best way to experience is the three rivers trip, which purls through the best the Balkans have to offer.\"

Tourist attractions

This article is in list format, but may read better as prose. You can help by converting this article, if appropriate. Editing help is available. (May 2019)

Some of the tourist attractions in Bosnia and Herzegovina include:

Sarajevo, the \"Olympic City\" or \"European Jerusalem\"; the scientific, cultural, tourist and commercial center of Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as its capital

Vratnik old town and Bijela Tabija fortress in Sarajevo

Shrine of Our Lady of Međugorje, with Annual Youth Festival; the site of a Marian apparition and subsequent Catholic pilgrimage destination

Mostar, the \"City on Neretva\" or \"City of Sunshine\"; the location of the UNESCO World Heritage Sites of Stari most and old-town Mostar

Višegrad, location of the UNESCO World Heritage Site of the Mehmed Paša Sokolović Bridge

Banja Luka, the \"Green City\", with sights such as the Kastel fortress and Ferhadija mosque

Bihać and the waterfalls of the river Una within Una National Park

Jajce, city of the Bosnian kings and the place where the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia was founded, Pliva lakes and waterfall

Prijedor, featuring its Old City Mosque, Kozara National Park and, at Mrakovica, Bosnia's largest World War II monument

The salt-lakes of Tuzla, birthplace of Meša Selimović

The Neretva river and the Rakitnica river canyons in Upper Neretva

The Trebižat river and its waterfalls at Kravica and Koćuša

The Buna with its spring and historic town of Blagaj

The Lower Tara river canyon, the deepest canyon in Europe

Sutjeska National Park, featuring the ancient forest of Perućica and the Sutjeska river canyon

Počitelj historical village

Mount Bjelašnica and Jahorina, sites used during XIV Olympic Winter Games in 1984

Neum, the only coastal city in Bosnia and Herzegovina with direct access to the Adriatic Sea

Doboj and its 13th-century fortress

Stolac, featuring the Begovina neighborhood and Radimlja tombstones

Visoko, city of the Bosnian nobility and monarchy, historical capital of the Kingdom of Bosnia and the site of the alleged Bosnian pyramids

Prokoško Lake in Fojnica

Tešanj, one of Bosnia's oldest known cities

Bijeljina, known for its agriculture and ethnic village Stanišić

Lukavac, featuring Modrac Lake, the largest artificial lake in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Travnik, the birthplace of Ivo Andrić and once the capital city of the Bosnia Eyalet

Jablanica, Museum of Battle of Neretva and Old bridge destroyed by Yugoslav army in Second World War

Ostrožac Castle, a 16th-century castle built by the Ottoman Empire and later expanded by the House of Habsburg

Konjic, featuring Tito's underground nuclear bunker

Drvar, featuring Tito's cave and great natural landscapes

Education

Main article: Education in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The University of Sarajevo's Faculty of Law

Higher education has a long and rich tradition in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The first bespoke higher-education institution was a school of Sufi philosophy established by Gazi Husrev-beg in 1531. Numerous other religious schools then followed. In 1887, under the Austro-Hungarian Empire, a Sharia law school began a five-year program. In the 1940s the University of Sarajevo became the city's first secular higher education institute. In the 1950s post-bachelaurate graduate degrees became available. Severely damaged during the war, it was recently rebuilt in partnership with more than 40 other universities. There are various other institutions of higher education, including: University \"Džemal Bijedić\" of Mostar, University of Banja Luka, University of Mostar, University of East Sarajevo, University of Tuzla, American University in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Academy of Sciences and Arts of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is held in high regard as one of the most prestigious creative arts academies in the region.

Also, Bosnia and Herzegovina is home to several private and international higher education institutions, some of which are:

Sarajevo School of Science and Technology

International University of Sarajevo

American University in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Sarajevo Graduate School of Business

International Burch University

Primary schooling lasts for nine years. Secondary education is provided by general and technical secondary schools (typically Gymnasiums) where studies typically last for four years. All forms of secondary schooling include an element of vocational training. Pupils graduating from general secondary schools obtain the Matura and can enroll in any tertiary educational institution or academy by passing a qualification examination prescribed by the governing body or institution. Students graduating technical subjects obtain a Diploma.

Culture

Main article: Culture of Bosnia and Herzegovina

The National Library in Sarajevo.

Architecture

Main article: Architecture of Bosnia and Herzegovina

The architecture of Bosnia and Herzegovina is largely influenced by four major periods where political and social changes influenced the creation of distinct cultural and architectural habits of the population. Each period made its influence felt and contributed to a greater diversity of cultures and architectural language in this region.

Media

Main article: Media of Bosnia and Herzegovina

The Radio and Television of Bosnia and Herzegovina headquarter in Sarajevo.

Some television, magazines, and newspapers in Bosnia and Herzegovina are state-owned, and some are for-profit corporations funded by advertising, subscription, and other sales-related revenues. The Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina guarantees freedom of speech.

As a country in transition with a post-war legacy and a complex domestic political structure Bosnia and Herzegovina's media system is under transformation. In the early post-war period (1995–2005), media development was guided mainly by international donors and cooperation agencies, who invested to help reconstruct, diversify, democratize and professionalize media outlets.

Post-war developments included the establishment of an independent Communication Regulatory Agency, the adoption of a Press Code, the establishment of the Press Council, the decriminalization of label and defamation, the introduction of a rather advanced Freedom of Access to Information Law, and the creation of a Public Service Broadcasting System from the formerly state-owned broadcaster.
Yet, internationally backed positive developments have been often obstructed by domestic elites, and the professionalisation of media and journalists has proceeded only slowly. High levels of partisanship and linkages between the media and the political systems hinder the adherence to professional code of conducts.

Literature

Main article: Literature of Bosnia and Herzegovina

Bosnia and Herzegovina has a rich literature, including the Nobel prize winner Ivo Andrić and poets such as Croat Antun Branko Šimić, Aleksa Šantić, Jovan Dučić and Mak Dizdar, writers such as Zlatko Topčić, Meša Selimović, Semezdin Mehmedinović, Miljenko Jergović, Isak Samokovlija, Safvet beg Bašagić, Abdulah Sidran, Petar Kočić, Aleksandar Hemon, and Nedžad Ibrišimović. The National Theater was founded 1919 in Sarajevo and its first director was the dramatist Branislav Nušić.
Magazines such as Novi Plamen or Sarajevske sveske are some of the more prominent publications covering cultural and literary themes.

Art

Main article: Art of Bosnia and Herzegovina

Stećci from Radimlja, near Stolac (13th century)

The art of Bosnia and Herzegovina was always evolving and ranged from the original medieval tombstones called Stećci to paintings in Kotromanić court. However, only with the arrival of Austro-Hungarians did the painting renaissance in Bosnia really begin to flourish. The first educated artists from European academies appeared with the beginning of the 20th century. Among those are: Gabrijel Jurkić, Petar Šain, Roman Petrović and Lazar Drljača.

After World War II artists like Mersad Berber and Safet Zec rose in popularity.

In 2007, Ars Aevi, a museum of contemporary art that includes works by renowned world artists was founded in Sarajevo.

Music

Main article: Music of Bosnia and Herzegovina

See also: List of Bosnia and Herzegovina patriotic songs

Typical Bosnian and Herzegovinian songs are ganga, rera, and the traditional Slavic music for the folk dances such as kolo and from Ottoman era the most popular is sevdalinka. Pop and Rock music has a tradition here as well, with the more famous musicians including Dino Zonić, Goran Bregović, Davorin Popović, Kemal Monteno, Zdravko Čolić, Elvir Laković, Edo Maajka, Hari Mata Hari and Dino Merlin. Other composers such as Đorđe Novković, Al' Dino, Haris Džinović, Kornelije Kovač, and many pop and rock bands, for example, Bijelo Dugme, Crvena Jabuka, Divlje Jagode, Indexi, Plavi Orkestar, Zabranjeno Pušenje, Ambasadori, Dubioza kolektiv, who were among the leading ones in the former Yugoslavia. Bosnia is home to the composer Dušan Šestić, the creator of the national anthem of Bosnia and Herzegovina and father of singer Marija Šestić, to the world known jazz musician, educator and Bosnian jazz ambassador Sinan Alimanović, composer Saša Lošić and pianist Saša Toperić. In the villages, especially in Herzegovina, Bosniaks, Serbs, and Croats play the ancient Gusle. The gusle is used mainly to recite epic poems in a usually dramatic tone.

Probably the most distinctive and identifiably \"Bosnian\" of music, Sevdalinka is a kind of emotional, melancholic folk song that often describes sad subjects such as love and loss, the death of a dear person or heartbreak. Sevdalinkas were traditionally performed with a saz, a Turkish string instrument, which was later replaced by the accordion. However the more modern arrangement, to the derision of some purists, is typically a vocalist accompanied by the accordion along with snare drums, upright bass, guitars, clarinets and violins.

Main article: Bosnian root music

Rural folk traditions in Bosnia and Herzegovina include the shouted, polyphonic ganga and \"ravne pjesme\" (flat song) styles, as well as instruments like a droneless bagpipe, wooden flute and šargija. The gusle, an instrument found throughout the Balkans, is also used to accompany ancient Slavic epic poems. There are also Bosnian folk songs in the Ladino language, derived from the area's Jewish population.

Bosnians dancing a traditional Kolo

Bosnian roots music came from Middle Bosnia, Posavina, the Drina valley and Kalesija. It is usually performed by singers with two violinists and a šargija player. These bands first appeared around World War I and became popular in the 1960s. This is the third oldest music following after the sevdalinka and ilahija. Self-taught people, mostly in two or three members of the different choices of old instruments, mostly in the violin, sacking, saz, drums, flutes (zurle) or wooden flute, as others have already called, the original performers of Bosnian music that can not be written notes, transmitted by ear from generation to generation, family is usually hereditary. It is thought to be brought from Persia-Kalesi tribe that settled in the area of present Sprecanski valleys and hence probably the name Kalesija. In this part of Bosnia it is the most common. Again, it became the leader of First World War onwards, as well as 60 years in the field Sprecanski doline. This kind of music was enjoyed by all three peoples in Bosnia, Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs, and it contributed a lot to reconcile people socializing, entertainment and other organizations through festivala. In Kalesija it is maintained each year with the Bosnian Festival Original music.

Studio Kemix firm Dzemal Dzihanovic from Živinice together with his artists brought this kind of music to perfection at the end 20th century. With its entirely new form of modernity, it is most common in the Tuzla Canton and the cradle of this music city Živinice was named Bosnian town of original music. Songs are performed preferably in a diphthong, the first and second voice which is a special secret performance of this music and some performers sing in troglasju as they do Kalesijski triple that was recorded in 1968, as the first written record of the tone on the album, along with Higurashi no naku.

Cinema and theatre

Main article: List of Bosnia-Herzegovina films

Sarajevo is internationally renowned for its eclectic and diverse selection of festivals. The Sarajevo Film Festival was established in 1995, during the Bosnian War and has become the premier and largest film festival in the Balkans and South-East Europe.

Bosnia has a rich cinematic and film heritage, dating back to the Kingdom of Yugoslavia; many Bosnian filmmakers have achieved international prominence and some have won international awards ranging from the Academy Awards to multiple Palme d'Ors and Golden Bears. Some notable Bosnian screenwriters, directors and producers are Danis Tanović (known for the Academy Award– and Golden Globe Award–winning 2001 film No Man's Land and Silver Bear Grand Jury Prize–winning 2016 film Death in Sarajevo), Emir Kusturica (won two Palme d'Or at Cannes), Jasmila Žbanić (won Golden Bear), Zlatko Topčić, Ademir Kenović, Dino Mustafić, Ahmed Imamović, Pjer Žalica, Aida Begić, Adis Bakrač, etc.

Cuisine

Main article: Bosnia and Herzegovina cuisine

Bosnian meat platter

Bosnian cuisine uses many spices, in moderate quantities. Most dishes are light, as they are boiled; the sauces are fully natural, consisting of little more than the natural juices of the vegetables in the dish. Typical ingredients include tomatoes, potatoes, onions, garlic, peppers, cucumbers, carrots, cabbage, mushrooms, spinach, zucchini, dried beans, fresh beans, plums, milk, paprika and cream called Pavlaka. Bosnian cuisine is balanced between Western and Eastern influences. As a result of the Ottoman administration for almost 500 years, Bosnian food is closely related to Turkish, Greek, and other former Ottoman and Mediterranean cuisines. However, because of years of Austrian rule, there are many influences from Central Europe. Typical meat dishes include primarily beef and lamb. Some local specialties are ćevapi, burek, dolma, sarma, pilav, goulash, ajvar and a whole range of Eastern sweets. Ćevapi is a grilled dish of minced meat, a type of kebab, popular in former Yugoslavia and considered a national dish in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia. Local wines come from Herzegovina where the climate is suitable for growing grapes. Herzegovinian loza (similar to Italian Grappa but less sweet) is very popular. Plum (rakija) or apple (jabukovača) alcohol beverages are produced in the north. In the south, distilleries used to produce vast quantities of brandy and supply all of ex-Yugoslav alcohol factories (brandy is the base of most alcoholic drinks).

Leisure activities

Coffeehouses, where Bosnian coffee is served in džezva with rahat lokum and sugar cubes, proliferate Sarajevo and every city in the country. Coffee drinking is a favorite Bosnian pastime and part of the culture. Bosnia and Herzegovina is the ninth country in the entire world by per capita coffee consumption.

Sports

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

See also: Bosnia and Herzegovina at the Olympics and Football in Bosnia and Herzegovina

The Asim Ferhatović Hase Stadium in Sarajevo hosted the opening ceremony to the 1984 Winter Olympics

Edin Džeko, captain of the Bosnian national football team

Bosnia and Herzegovina has produced many athletes, both as a state in Yugoslavia and independently after 1992. The most important international sporting event in the history of Bosnia and Herzegovina was the 14th Winter Olympics, held in Sarajevo from 7 to 19 February 1984.
The Borac handball club has won seven Yugoslav Handball Championships, as well as the European Championship Cup in 1976 and the International Handball Federation Cup in 1991.

Amel Mekić, Bosnian judoka, became European champion in 2011. Track and field athlete Amel Tuka won the bronze medal in 800 metres at the 2015 World Championships and Hamza Alić won the silver medal in shot put at the 2013 European Indoor Championships.

The Bosna Royal basketball club from Sarajevo were European Champions in 1979. The Yugoslav national basketball team, which won medals in every world championship from 1963 through 1990, included Bosnian players such as FIBA Hall of Famers Dražen Dalipagić and Mirza Delibašić. Bosnia and Herzegovina regularly qualifies for the European Championship in Basketball, with players including Mirza Teletović, Nihad Đedović and Jusuf Nurkić. Bosnia and Herzegovina national u-16 team won two gold medals in 2015, winning both 2015 European Youth Summer Olympic Festival as well as 2015 FIBA Europe Under-16 Championship.

Women's basketball club Jedinstvo Aida from Tuzla won Women's European Club Championship in 1989 and Ronchetti Cup final in 1990, led by Razija Mujanović, three times best female European basketball player, and Mara Lakić

The Bosnian chess team was Champion of Yugoslavia seven times, in addition to club ŠK Bosna winning four European Chess Club Cups. Chess grandmaster Borki Predojević has also won two European Championships. The most impressive success of Bosnian Chess was runner-up position in Chess Olympiad of 1994 in Moscow, featuring Grandmasters Predrag Nikolić, Ivan Sokolov and Bojan Kurajica.

Middle-weight boxer Marijan Beneš has won several Championships of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Yugoslav Championships and the European Championship. In 1978, he won the World Title against Elisha Obed from the Bahamas.

Amel Tuka, a middle-distance runner who earned country's first medal in a major athletics championship

Association football is the most popular sport in Bosnia and Herzegovina. It dates from 1903, but its popularity grew significantly after World War I. Bosnian clubs FK Sarajevo and Željezničar, won the Yugoslav Championship, while the Yugoslav national football team included Bosnian players of all ethnic backgrounds and generations, such as Safet Sušić, Zlatko Vujović, Mehmed Baždarević, Davor Jozić, Faruk Hadžibegić, Predrag Pašić, Blaž Slišković, Vahid Halilhodžić, Dušan Bajević, Ivica Osim, Josip Katalinski, Tomislav Knez, Velimir Sombolac and numerous others. The Bosnia and Herzegovina national football team played at the 2014 FIFA World Cup, its first major tournament. Players on the team again includes notable players of all country's ethnic background, such as then and now captains Emir Spahić, Zvjezdan Misimović and Edin Džeko, defenders like Ognjen Vranješ, Sead Kolašinac and Toni Šunjić, midfielders like Miralem Pjanić and Senad Lulić, striker Vedad Ibišević, and so on.

Former Bosnian footballers include Hasan Salihamidžić, who became only the second Bosnian to ever win a UEFA Champions League trophy, after Elvir Baljić. He made 234 appearances and scored 31 goals for German club FC Bayern Munich. Sergej Barbarez, who played for several clubs in the German Bundesliga including Borussia Dortmund, Hamburger SV and Bayer Leverkusen was joint-top scorer in the 2000–01 Bundesliga season with 22 goals. Meho Kodro spent most of his career playing in Spain most notably with Real Sociedad and FC Barcelona. Elvir Rahimić made 302 appearances for Russian club CSKA Moscow with whom he won the UEFA Cup in 2005. Milena Nikolić, member of women's national team, was 2013–14 UEFA Women's Champions League top scorer.

Bosnia and Herzegovina was the world champion of volleyball at the 2004 Summer Paralympics and volleyball at the 2012 Summer Paralympics. Many among those on the team lost their legs in the Bosnian War.

Tennis is also gaining a lot of popularity after the recent successes of Damir Džumhur and Mirza Bašić at Grand Slam level. Other notable tennis players who represented Bosnia are, Amer Delić and Mervana Jugić-Salkić.

See also

Bosnia and Herzegovina portal

Bosniakisation

Outline of Bosnia and Herzegovina

Notes

^ /ˈbɒzniə ... ˌhɛərtsəɡoʊˈviːnə, -ˌhɜːrt-, -ɡə-/ (listen) or /ˌhɜːrtsəˈɡɒvɪnə/; Serbo-Croatian: Bosna i Hercegovina / Боснa и Херцеговина, pronounced 

^ Serbo-Croatian: BiH / БиХ

References

^ a b c d \"Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina\" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 October 2015. Retrieved 6 March 2015.

^ https://mojabih.oslobodjenje.ba/vijesti/danas-se-iz-norveske-kuci-vraca-13-drzavljana-bih-a-sta-je-sa-ostalima/2700

^ https://en.populationdata.net/countries/bosnia-and-herzegovina/

^ https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/bk.html

^ CIA 2019.

^ United Nations. \"World Population Prospects 2019\".

^ \"Demography 2016\" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 November 2018. Retrieved 24 October 2018.

^ a b c d \"Report for Selected Countries and Subjects\". IMF. 28 December 2019.

^ \"Distribution of family income – Gini index\". The World Factbook. TWB. Archived from the original on 29 October 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017.

^ \"Human Development Report 2019\". United Nations Development Programme. 10 December 2019. Retrieved 10 December 2019.

^ a b c d \"Census of population, households and dwellings in Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2013: Final results\" (PDF). Agency for Statistics of Bosnia and Herzegovina. June 2016. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 June 2016. Retrieved 1 July 2016.

^ Jones, Daniel (2003) , Peter Roach; James Hartmann; Jane Setter (eds.), English Pronouncing Dictionary, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 3-12-539683-2

^ \"Bosnia\". Merriam-Webster Dictionary., \"Herzegovina\". Merriam-Webster Dictionary.

^ \"Human Development Indices and Indicators: 2018 Statistical Update\" (PDF). UNDP. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 March 2017. Retrieved 16 September 2018.

^ \"List of Member States of the Union for the Mediterranean - UfM\". Archived from the original on 12 May 2018. Retrieved 5 May 2018.

^ \"Membership Action Plan (MAP)\". nato.int. NATO. Archived from the original on 18 April 2015. Retrieved 6 April 2015. In April 2010, NATO Foreign Ministers at their meeting in Tallinn, reviewed progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina's reform efforts and invited the country to join the Membership Action Plan.

^ \"About the Sarajevo Film Festival\". Sarajevo Film Festival Official Website. Archived from the original on 4 November 2012.

^ \"Inside Film's Guide to Film Festivals\". Inside Film. Archived from the original on 15 January 2016. Retrieved 12 February 2016.

^ Constantine VIIPorphyrogenitus (1993). De Administrando Imperio (Moravcsik, Gyula ed.). Washington D.C.: Dumbarton Oaks Center for Byzantine Studies. pp. 153–55.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Malcolm 2002.

^ William Miller (1921). Essays on the Latin Orient. Cambridge. p. 464.

^ Fine 1994, p. 578.

^ The World Factbook (Washington DC: National Foreign Assessment Center, Central Intelligence Agency, 2013), 90-93. ISBN 0160921953

^ Suetonius, Tiberius 16,17

^ Miller, Norma. Tacitus: Annals I, 2002, ISBN 1-85399-358-1. It had originally been joined to Illyricum, but after the great Illyrian/Pannonian revolt of AD 6 it was made a separate province with its own governor

^ Stipčević, Aleksandar, The Illyrians: History and Culture, 1974, Noyess Press

^ Ardian, Adzanela (Axhanela) (2004). Illyrian Bosnia and Herzegovina-an overview of a cultural legacy. Centre for Balkan Studies, Online Balkan Centre.

^ a b Robert J. Donia; John VA Fine (1994). Bosnia and Hercegovina: A Tradition Betrayed. Columbia University Press. pp. 14–16.

^ Hupchick, Dennis P. The Balkans from Constantinople to Communism, pp. 28–30. Palgrave Macmillan (2004)

^ a b c Fine 1991, p. 53.

^ Heather, Peter (2010). Empires and Barbarians: The Fall of Rome and the Birth of Europe. Oxford University Press. pp. 404–406. Archived from the original on 20 August 2016.

^ a b Basic 2009, p. 123.

^ Basic 2009, p. 123-28.

^ Fine 1991, p. 223.

^ Paul Mojzes. Religion and the war in Bosnia. Oxford University Press, 2000, p 22; \"Medieval Bosnia was founded as an independent state (Banate) by Ban Kulin (1180–1204).\".

^ Fine 1991, p. 288.

^ Robert J. Donia, John V.A Fine (2005). Bosnia and Hercegovina: A Tradition Betrayed. C. Hurst Co. Publishers. Archived from the original on 15 September 2015., p. 71; In the Middle Ages the Bosnians called themselves \"Bosnians\" or used even more local (county, regional) names.

^ Kolstø, Pål (2005). Myths and boundaries in south-eastern Europe. Hurst Co., p. 120; ..medieval Bosnia was a country of one people, of the single Bosnian people called the Bošnjani, who belonged to three confessions.

^ John V.A. Fine. \"What is a Bosnian?\". London Review of Books; Vol.16 No.8. 28 April 1994. pp. 9–10. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved 30 June 2016.

^ \"Declared as national monument\". Archived from the original on 16 January 2009.

^ Anđelić Pavao, Krunidbena i grobna crkva bosanskih vladara u Milima (Arnautovićima) kod Visokog. Glasnik Zemaljskog muzeja XXXIV/1979., Zemaljski muzej Bosne i Hercegovine, Sarajevo, 1980,183–247

^ Singleton, Frederick Bernard (1985). A Short History of the Yugoslav Peoples. Cambridge University Press. p. 496. ISBN 0-521-27485-0.

^ Buzov, Snježana (2004). Koller, Markus (ed.). \"Ottoman Perceptions of Bosnia as Reflected in the Works of Ottoman Authors who Visited or Lived in Bosnia\". Ottoman Bosnia: A History in Peril. University of Wisconsin Press: 83–92. Cite journal requires |journal= (help)

^ Velikonja 2003, pp. 29–30.

^ a b c Riedlmayer, Andras (1993). A Brief History of Bosnia–Herzegovina Archived 18 June 2006 at the Wayback Machine. The Bosnian Manuscript Ingathering Project.

^ a b c Imamović, Mustafa (1996). Historija Bošnjaka. Sarajevo: BZK Preporod; ISBN 9958-815-00-1

^ Koller, Markus (2004). Bosnien an der Schwelle zur Neuzeit : eine Kulturgeschichte der Gewalt. Munich: Oldenbourg. ISBN 978-3-486-57639-9.

^ Hajdarpasic, Edin (2015). Whose Bosnia? Nationalism and Political Imagination in the Balkans, 1840-1914. Cornell University Press. pp. 6–13. ISBN 9780801453717.

^ Hajdarpasic 2015, p. 161-165.

^ Sugar, Peter (1963). Industrialization of Bosnia-Hercegovina : 1878-1918. Seattle: University of Washington Press. ISBN 0295738146.

^ Albertini 2005, p. 94.

^ Albertini 2005, p. 140.

^ Albertini 2005, p. 227.

^ Keil, Soeren (2013). Multinational Federalism in Bosnia and Herzegovina. London: Routledge. pp. 61–62.

^ Schachinger, Werner (1989). Die Bosniaken kommen: Elitetruppe in der k.u.k. Armee, 1879–1918. Leopold Stocker.

^ Banac, Ivo (1988). The National Question in Yugoslavia: Origins, History, Politics. Cornell University Press. p. 367. ISBN 978-0-8014-9493-2. Archived from the original on 4 January 2014. Retrieved 4 December 2013. The role of the Schutzkorps, auxiliary militia raised by the Austro-Hungarians, in the policy of anti-Serb repression is moot

^ a b c Velikonja 2003, p. 141.

^ Banac, Ivo (1988). The National Question in Yugoslavia: Origins, History, Politics. Cornell University Press. p. 149. ISBN 978-0-8014-9493-2. Archived from the original on 5 January 2014. Retrieved 4 December 2013.

^ Tomasevich 2001, p. 485The Bosnian wartime militia (Schutzkorps), which became known for its persecution of Serbs, was overwhelmingly Muslim.

^ Danijela Nadj. \"An International Symposium \"Southeastern Europe 1918–1995\"\". Hic.hr. Archived from the original on 22 August 2006. Retrieved 14 June 2006.

^ \"Balkan 'Auschwitz' haunts Croatia\". BBC News. 25 April 2005. Archived from the original on 9 August 2012. Retrieved 21 June 2012.

^ a b c Philip J. Cohen (1996). Serbia's Secret War: Propaganda and the Deceit of History. College Station: Texas AM University Press. pp. 109–10. ISBN 978-0-89096-760-7.

^ Ramet (2006), pgg. 118.

^ Velikonja 2003, p. 179.

^ Ramet, Sabrina P. (2006). The Three Yugoslavias: State-Building and Legitimation, 1918–2005. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. p. 145. ISBN 978-0-253-34656-8. Archived from the original on 31 March 2015. Retrieved 16 June 2015.

^ Tomasevich, Jozo (1975). War and Revolution in Yugoslavia, 1941–1945: The Chetniks. Stanford: Stanford University Press. pp. 256–261. ISBN 978-0-8047-0857-9. Archived from the original on 16 April 2015. Retrieved 16 June 2015.

^ Hoare, Marko Attila (2006). Genocide and Resistance in Hitler's Bosnia: The Partisans and the Chetniks 1941–1943. New York: Oxford University Press. p. 13. ISBN 978-0-19-726380-8.

^ a b Geiger, Vladimir. \"Human Losses of the Croats in World War II and the Immediate Post-War Period Caused by the Chetniks (Yugoslav Army in the Fatherand) and the Partisans (People's Liberation Army and the Partisan Detachments of Yugoslavia/Yugoslav Army) and the Communist Authorities: Numerical Indicators\". Croatian Institute of History: 85–87. Archived from the original on 17 November 2015. Retrieved 25 October 2015. Cite journal requires |journal= (help)

^ Lepre, George (1997). Himmler's Bosnian Division: The Waffen-SS Handschar Division 1943–1945. Schiffer Publishing. ISBN 0-7643-0134-9.

^ Hadžijahić, Muhamed (1973), \"Muslimanske rezolucije iz 1941 godine \", Istorija Naroda Bosne i Hercegovine (in Serbo-Croatian), Sarajevo: Institut za istoriju radničkog pokreta, p. 277

^ Redžić, Enver (2005). Bosnia and Herzegovina in the Second World War. London: Frank Cass. pp. 225–227.

^ Žerjavić, Vladimir. Yugoslavia manipulations with the number Second World War victims. Croatian Information Centre. ISBN 0-919817-32-7. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 12 February 2016.

^ Stojic, Mile (2005). Branko Mikulic – socialist emperor manqué Archived 9 August 2006 at the Wayback Machine. BH Dani

^ \"The Balkans: A post-Communist History\" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 July 2014. Retrieved 14 June 2006.

^ \"ICTY: Prlić et al. (IT-04-74)\". Archived from the original on 2 August 2009.

^ \"Prlic et al. Initial Indictment\". United Nations. Archived from the original on 28 February 2009. Retrieved 3 February 2010.

^ \"The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Case NO: IT-01-47-PT (Amended Indictment)\" (PDF). 11 January 2002. Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 May 2011. Retrieved 1 January 2009.

^ \"The Referendum on Independence in Bosnia–Herzegovina: February 29 – March 1, 1992\". Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe. 1992. p. 19. Archived from the original on 22 May 2011. Retrieved 28 December 2009.

^ Bose, Sumantra (2009). Contested lands: Israel-Palestine, Kashmir, Bosnia, Cyprus, and Sri Lanka. Harvard University Press. p. 124. Archived from the original on 11 January 2016. Retrieved 11 October 2015.

^ D. Grant, Thomas (2009). Admission to the United Nations: Charter Article 4 and the Rise of Universal Organization. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. p. 226. Archived from the original on 11 January 2016. Retrieved 11 October 2015.

^ Ramet, Sabrina P. (2006). The Three Yugoslavias: State-Building and Legitimation, 1918–2004. Indiana University Press. p. 379. ISBN 0-271-01629-9.

^ \"ICTY: Naletilić and Martinović verdict – A. Historical background\". Archived from the original on 19 June 2009.

^ \"ICTY: The attack against the civilian population and related requirements\". Archived from the original on 19 February 2009.

^ The Geography of Genocide, Allan D. Cooper, p. 178, University Press of America, 2008, ISBN 0-7618-4097-4

^ \"Judgement\". UN. 5 March 2007. Archived from the original on 16 October 2008. Retrieved 13 January 2013.

^ \"Press Release\". UN. 5 March 2007. Archived from the original on 24 March 2009. Retrieved 7 January 2013.

^ \"Crimes in Stolac Municipality\" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 January 2009.

^ \"Indictment\". UN. 5 March 2007. Archived from the original on 12 February 2005. Retrieved 7 January 2013.

^ \"Research and Documentation Center: Rezultati istraživanja \"Ljudski gubici '91–'95\"\". idc.org.ba. Archived from the original on 3 December 2010.

^ \"The humanitarian operation in Bosnia, 1992–95: the dilemmas of negotiating humanitarian access\" (PDF). United Nations High Commission for Refugees. May 1999. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 June 2008. Retrieved 24 June 2008.

^ \"ICTY: Conflict between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia\". Archived from the original on 6 June 2008. Retrieved 22 June 2008.

^ \"ICTY: Conflict between Bosnia and Croatia\". Archived from the original on 6 June 2008. Retrieved 22 June 2008.

^ ICTY cases, indictments and proceedings Archived 6 August 2009 at the Wayback Machine

^ \"Bosnia holds ceremony for remains of 284 found in mass grave\". MSN News. Archived from the original on 22 July 2014. Retrieved 20 July 2014.

^ \"ICJ: The genocide case: Bosnia v. Serbia\" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 October 2012. Retrieved 22 June 2008.

^ \"Bosnian protests: A Balkan Spring?\". bbc.co.uk. 8 February 2014. Archived from the original on 9 February 2014. Retrieved 8 February 2014.

^ \"Građanski bunt u BiH\". klix.ba. 8 February 2014. Archived from the original on 7 February 2014. Retrieved 8 February 2014.

^ Bilefsky, Dan (8 February 2014). \"Protests Over Government and Economy Roil Bosnia\". nytimes.com. Archived from the original on 8 February 2014. Retrieved 8 February 2014.

^ \"Bosnian Protesters Torch Government Buildings in Sarajevo, Tuzla\". rferl.org. 8 February 2014. Archived from the original on 8 February 2014. Retrieved 8 February 2014.

^ \"Bosnia–Hercegovina protests break out in violence\". bbc.co.uk. 8 February 2014. Archived from the original on 7 February 2014. Retrieved 8 February 2014.

^ \"Bosnian protesters storm government buildings\". The Sydney Morning Herald. 8 February 2014. Archived from the original on 17 June 2014. Retrieved 8 February 2014.

^ a b Field Listing – Coastline Archived 16 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine, The World Factbook, 22 August 2006

^ \"Bosnia and Herzegovina: I: Introduction\". Encarta. 2006. Archived from the original on 29 October 2009. Retrieved 12 February 2009.

^ Cuvalo, Ante (2010). The A to Z of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Plymouth, UK: Rowman Littlefield. p. lxxi, 154–155. ISBN 0810876477.

^ Bosnia-and-Herzegovina Neum britannica.com Archived 5 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine, britannica.com, 9 September 2015

^ CIA. sfn error: no target: CITEREFCIA (help)

^ a b Izet Čengić, Azra Čabaravdić. \"Watershed Management in Mountain Regions in Bosnia and Herzegovina\" (PDF). FAO. p. 113. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 October 2017. Retrieved 16 June 2011.

^ http://www.ohr.int/interview-christian-schwarz-schilling-high-representative-for-bih-the-last-bosnian-viceroy-4/

^ A Biographical Encyclopedia of Contemporary Genocide: Portraits of Evil and Good, p. 25, at Google Books

^ https://www.economist.com/europe/1998/09/03/carlos-westendorp-bosnias-euro-spanish-viceroy

^ https://www.economist.com/eastern-approaches/2011/04/13/two-visions-for-bosnia

^ \"Parliamentarism in Bosnia and Herzegovina during the period 1945 – 1990\". www.parlament.ba. Archived from the original on 13 September 2018. Retrieved 24 November 2018.

^ Marjan Nikolov and Borce Trenovski and Gabriela Dimovska (2015). \"Open and transparent budget process in Western Balkan countries\" (PDF). MPRA Paper No. 76299. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 October 2015. Retrieved 1 November 2014.

^ OHR Bulletin 66 (3 February 1998). Final hearing of the Arbitration Tribunal in Vienna Archived 5 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine. OHR.

^ \"'The Contradictions of \"Democracy\" without Consent', East European Constitutional Review, New York University Law School, 1998\". Archived from the original on 17 May 2013.

^ \"Bosnia breaks through ethnic divide by merging Serb, Muslim-Croat forces\". Stars and Stripes. 11 January 2006. Archived from the original on 2 October 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2015.

^ \"European Commission – Enlargement – Bosnia and Herzegovina – Relations with the EU\". Europa (web portal). Archived from the original on 26 January 2009. Retrieved 3 January 2009.

^ \"Bosnia gets Nato membership plan\". 22 April 2010. Archived from the original on 28 March 2019. Retrieved 9 March 2019.

^ \"NATO Approves Membership Action Plan for Bosnia\". Balkan Insight. 5 December 2018. Retrieved 9 March 2019.

^ \"Population, total | Data\". data.worldbank.org. Retrieved 2 August 2019.

^ Ljubas, Zdravko (3 February 2011). \"Hopes Fade For Census in Bosnia in 2011\". Balkan Insight. Archived from the original on 16 August 2016. Retrieved 1 July 2016.

^ Kurt, Senka (1 August 2011). \"Bosnia Edges Closer To Population Census\". Balkan Insight. Archived from the original on 29 July 2013. Retrieved 26 March 2013.

^ abc, Census shows dramatic decline in Bosnian population since 1990s Archived 6 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine

^ \"Second Class Citizens: Discrimination against Roma, Jews, and Other National Minorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina\". Human Rights Watch. 4 April 2012. Archived from the original on 16 August 2016. Retrieved 1 July 2016.

^ Toe, Rodolfo (30 June 2016). \"Census Reveals Bosnia's Changed Demography\". Balkan Insight. Archived from the original on 30 June 2016. Retrieved 1 July 2016.

^ Toe, Rodolfo (30 June 2016). \"Bosnia to Publish Census Without Serb Agreement\". Balkan Insight. Archived from the original on 30 June 2016. Retrieved 1 July 2016.

^ \"Bosnia–Herzegovina has lost a fifth of its pre-war population\". The Guardian. 2016. Archived from the original on 7 July 2016. Retrieved 11 July 2016.

^ Faingold, Eduardo D. (2004). \"Language rights and language justice in the constitutions of the world\" (PDF). Language Problems Language Planning. 28 (1): 11–24. doi:10.1075/lplp.28.1.03fai.

^ Sadurski, Wojciech (2005). Rights Before Courts: A Study of Constitutional Courts in Postcommunist States of Central and Eastern Europe. Springer. p. 342. ISBN 1402030061.

^ a b c Footitt, Hilary; Kelly, Michael (2012). Languages at War: Policies and Practices of Language Contacts in Conflict. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 111–120. ISBN 0230368778.

^ Greenberg, Robert David (2004). Language and Identity in the Balkans: Serbo-Croatian and its Disintegration. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-925815-4.

^ Kelly, Michael; Baker, Catherine (2013). Interpreting the Peace: Peace Operations, Conflict and Language in Bosnia–Herzegovina. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 10. ISBN 1137029838.

^ \"Reservations and Declarations for Treaty No.148 – European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages\". Council of Europe. Council of Europe. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 25 April 2017.

^ Arbeitsgemeinschaft Deutscher Minderheiten. \"Deutsche Minderheit in Bosnien-Herzegowina – German minority in Bosnia and Herzegovina\". fuen.org. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015.

^ \"2016 Report on International Religious Freedom: Bosnia and Herzegovina\". United States Department of State. 2020. Retrieved 12 July 2020.

^ a b \"The World's Muslims: Unity and Diversity\" (PDF). Pew Research Center. 2012. p. 30. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 January 2017. Retrieved 7 April 2016.

^ \"CIA – The World Factbook – Bosnia and Herzegovina\". Archived from the original on 6 April 2011. Retrieved 23 September 2009.

^ \"Final results\" (PDF) (pdf). Popis 2013 BiH. Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 October 2017. Retrieved 19 December 2017.

^ \"2013 Census of Population, Households and Dwellings in Bosnia and Herzegovina – final results\" (PDF). popis.gov.ba. Agency for Statistics of Bosnia and Herzegovina. 2013. Retrieved 19 April 2017.

^ \"Archived copy\". Archived from the original on 22 March 2019. Retrieved 22 March 2019.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ Ciric, Aleksandar. \"A Divided Bosnia, January 29, 1996\". Archived from the original on 5 September 2013. Retrieved 12 February 2016.

^ Daclon, Corrado Maria (1997). Bosnia. Maggioli. Italy

^ \"Post-conflict Bosnia and Herzegovina – Martha Walsh – Employment Sector\". ILO. Archived from the original on 7 September 2008. Retrieved 5 May 2009.

^ World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency.

^ \"Table 15: Inequality in income or expenditure\" (PDF). Human Development Report 2006. United Nations Development Programme. 2006. p. 335. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 December 2006. Retrieved 9 January 2007.

^ \"GDP per capita in PPS\". Eurostat. Archived from the original on 8 January 2012. Retrieved 1 October 2011.

^ Elvira M. Jukic. \"IMF To Loan Bosnia $500 Million\". Balkan Insight. Archived from the original on 9 May 2013. Retrieved 26 March 2013.

^ \"Siva ekonomija čini 25 posto BDP-a BiH\". Archived from the original on 1 June 2018. Retrieved 24 May 2018.

^ \"BiH povećala izvoz u 2017. godini: Evo koje države najviše uvoze naše proizvode - Kameleon MM\". radiokameleon.ba. Archived from the original on 17 February 2018. Retrieved 17 February 2018.

^ \"Izvoz u prošloj godini premašio 11 milijardi KM i povećan za 17 posto\". Archived from the original on 31 March 2018. Retrieved 31 March 2018.

^ \"Nezaposlenost prvi put ide ispod 20 posto - Biznis Info\". 15 March 2018. Archived from the original on 17 March 2018. Retrieved 16 March 2018.

^ \"Javni dug BiH prošle godine smanjen za 744,59 miliona KM\". Archived from the original on 5 May 2018. Retrieved 5 May 2018.

^ \"Više od 30.000 bh. kompanija ostvarilo ukupni prihod od 65 milijardi KM\". Archived from the original on 2 July 2018. Retrieved 2 July 2018.

^ \"U 2017. u BiH investirano 777,7 miliona KM - Biznis Info\". 9 August 2018. Archived from the original on 10 August 2018. Retrieved 10 August 2018.

^ \"Archived copy\" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 April 2019. Retrieved 11 September 2018.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ \"Američki IBM: BiH treća u svijetu po stranim investicijama, prema broju stanovnika - Biznis Info\". 6 September 2018. Archived from the original on 11 September 2018. Retrieved 11 September 2018.

^ \"Archived copy\". Archived from the original on 23 March 2019. Retrieved 23 March 2019.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ \"Prosječna cijena prodatih novih stanova u BiH 1.639 KM\". Archived from the original on 23 August 2018. Retrieved 22 August 2018.

^ \"Javni dug BiH oko 11,8 milijardi KM\". www.6yka.com. Archived from the original on 6 November 2018. Retrieved 6 November 2018.

^ \"U sedam mjeseci BiH posjetilo više od 800.000 turista - Biznis Info\". 10 September 2018. Archived from the original on 11 September 2018. Retrieved 11 September 2018.

^ \"Archived copy\". Archived from the original on 19 January 2019. Retrieved 18 January 2019.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ \"Archived copy\". Archived from the original on 31 January 2019. Retrieved 31 January 2019.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ \"Računar u poslovanju koristi 99,5 posto firmi u BiH, a internet 99,3 posto\". Klix.ba.

^ http://biznis.ba/cbbih-priliv-direktnih-stranih-investicija-u-2018-godini-7834-miliona-km/

^ \"Archived copy\". Archived from the original on 8 April 2019. Retrieved 9 April 2019.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ \"Archived copy\". Archived from the original on 10 January 2019. Retrieved 10 January 2019.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ \"Archived copy\". Archived from the original on 30 January 2019. Retrieved 30 January 2019.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ \"Archived copy\". Archived from the original on 26 March 2019. Retrieved 26 March 2019.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ https://www.klix.ba/biznis/prosjecna-cijena-prodatih-novih-stanova-1-606-km-po-kvadratu/190820100

^ \"Smanjen izvoz iz BiH u prvoj polovini 2019\". 22 July 2019.

^ https://www.klix.ba/biznis/privreda/za-sedam-mjeseci-u-bih-vise-od-900-hiljada-turista-ostvareno-1-8-miliona-nocenja/190916052

^ https://www.biznisinfo.ba/pojacan-priliv-direktnih-stranih-investicija/

^ \"EAD Basic – Error Page\". eurocontrol.int. Archived from the original on 23 August 2014. Retrieved 12 February 2016.

^ \"Bosnia–Herzegovina – Telecoms Market Overview Statistics Report Covers the Regulatory Environment, Major Players and Market Developments\". Businesswire.com. 8 October 2008. Archived from the original on 4 May 2009. Retrieved 3 January 2009.

^ Udovicic, Radenko (3 May 2002). What is Happening with the Oldest Bosnian-Herzegovinian Daily: Oslobođenje to be sold for 4.7 Million Marks Archived 27 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine Mediaonline.ba: Southeast European Media Journal.

^ \"Al Jazeera Launches Its Balkans Broadcast Centre\". The Guardian. London. 11 November 2011. Archived from the original on 26 January 2017. Retrieved 14 December 2016.

^ Vučićević, Bojan. \"Growing Influence of Global Media in Balkans\". Media Center Sarajevo. Archived from the original on 23 April 2018. Retrieved 22 April 2018.

^ \"Press Freedom Index\". Reporters Without Borders. Archived from the original on 21 November 2011. Retrieved 12 February 2016.

^ \"U BiH tokom 2017. registrovano više od 3 miliona korisnika interneta\". Archived from the original on 19 April 2018. Retrieved 19 April 2018.

^ a b Bosnia's newfound tourism Archived 24 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine, Reuters; accessed 31 March 2018.

^ \"Archived copy\". Archived from the original on 23 March 2019. Retrieved 23 March 2019.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ \"BiH: U 2017. ostvareno 1,3 miliona turističkih posjeta i 2,6 miliona noćenja\". Archived from the original on 17 February 2018. Retrieved 17 February 2018.

^ \"Lonely Planet: Sarajevo 43th  Best City in the World\". Bosnia Travel. Archived from the original on 23 February 2007.

^ \"Press Centre Lonely Planet Reveals Its Best Destinations, Journeys Experiences for 2010\". Lonely Planet. 2 November 2009. Archived from the original on 6 November 2010. Retrieved 4 January 2011.

^ Polat, Anil (27 March 2012). \"The Best City To Visit Travel Tournament 2012: Championship\". Foxnomad. Archived from the original on 30 March 2012. Retrieved 30 March 2012.

^ RomeReports: Visionaries of Medjugorje may appear before the Vatican Archived 5 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine; retrieved 26 February 2011.

^ Vatican Probes Claims of Apparitions at Medugorje Archived 25 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine, Reuters.com; retrieved 17 March 2010.

^  Archived 24 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine,

^ Bangs, Richard (10 January 2013). \"13 Greatest Adventures For 2013\". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on 11 January 2013. Retrieved 11 January 2013.

^ Caludio Agostoni, Parallelzero. \"Exploring Tito's Cold War bunker\". gulfnews.com. Archived from the original on 3 July 2012. Retrieved 3 July 2012.

^ University of Sarajevo Archived 10 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine on Sarajevo official web site

^ \"About University\". University of Sarajevo. Archived from the original on 4 December 2008.

^ \"Education System in Bosnia and Herzegovina\". EuroEducation.net – The European Education Directory. Archived from the original on 15 February 2012. Retrieved 18 July 2007.

^ Hozić, 2008; Thompson De Luce, 2002; Kurspahić, 2003; Jusić, 2006

^ a b Tarik Jusić, \"Bosnia and Herzegovina Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine\", EJC Media Landscapes

^ \"Home Festival Awards Juries: International Jury \"Prizes of the International Jury\". www.berlinale.de/en. 2016. Archived from the original on 16 August 2011. Retrieved 23 February 2016.

^ \"Bosnia and Herzegovina\". Encyclopædia Britannica. 2009. Archived from the original on 3 May 2009. Retrieved 27 July 2009.

^ Britannica, Encyclopedia (11 August 2002). \"Encyclopedia britannica\". Encyclopedia Britannica – via Google Books.

^ Countries and Their Cultures: Saint Kitts and Nevis to Zimbabwe. p. 68.

^ \"Serbian cuisine\". TravelSerbia.Info – Your travel guide for Serbia. Archived from the original on 30 March 2010. Retrieved 9 August 2010.

^ Jones, Lora (13 April 2018). \"Coffee: Who grows, drinks and pays the most?\". BBC News. Archived from the original on 13 June 2018. Retrieved 13 May 2018.

^ \"Ring zamijenio nalivperom\" (in Bosnian, Croatian, and Serbian). Nezavisne novine. 12 June 2005. Archived from the original on 1 October 2007.

Bibliography

Allcock, John B., Marko Milivojevic, et al. Conflict in the Former Yugoslavia: An Encyclopedia (1998)

CIA (9 May 2019). \"Bosnia and Herzegovina\". The World Factbook. Retrieved 13 May 2019.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Fine, John Van Antwerp, Jr. (1991). The Early Medieval Balkans: A Critical Survey from the Sixth to the Late Twelfth Century. University of Michigan Press. ISBN 978-0-472-08149-3.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Fine, John Van Antwerp, Jr. (1994). The Late Medieval Balkans: A Critical Survey from the Late Twelfth Century to the Ottoman Conquest. University of Michigan Press. ISBN 9780472082605.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Basic, Denis (2009). \"4.1.1. Early Medieval Bosnia in Porphyrogenitus' De Administrando Imperio\". The Roots of the Religious, Ethnic, and National Identity of the Bosnian-Herzegovinian Muslims. University of Washington.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Coupland, Nikolas (2010). The Handbook of Language and Globalization. Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-7581-4.

Phillips, Douglas A. Bosnia and Herzegovina (Philadelphia: Chelsea House, 2004).

Robin Okey, Taming Balkan Nationalism: The Habsburg 'Civilizing' Mission in Bosnia, 1878–1914 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007)

Tomasevich, Jozo (2001). War and Revolution in Yugoslavia: 1941–1945. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-7924-1. Retrieved 4 December 2013.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Albertini, Luigi (1952). The Origins of the War of 1914: European relations from the Congress of Berlin to the eve of the Sarajevo murder. Oxford University Press.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Albertini, Luigi (2005). Jochen Thies (ed.). The Origins of the War of 1914. Enigma Books. ISBN 978-1-929631-26-1.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Malcolm, Noel (2002). Bosnia: A Short History. Pan Books. ISBN 978-0-330-41244-5.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Velikonja, Mitja (2003). Religious Separation and Political Intolerance in Bosnia–Herzegovina. Texas AM University Press. ISBN 978-1-58544-226-3.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Bataković, Dušan T. (1996). The Serbs of Bosnia Herzegovina: History and Politics. Dialogue Association.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Hoare, Marko Attila (2007). The History of Bosnia: From the Middle Ages to the Present Day. Saqi Books. ISBN 978-0863569531.

Munro, Robert (2015) . Rambles and Studies in Bosnia-Herzegovina and Dalmatia. Palala Press. ISBN 978-1346798868.

Holbach, Maude M. (2016). Bosnia and Herzegovina, Some Wayside Wanderings. Palala Press. ISBN 978-1355062769.

Hadziselimovic, Omer (2001). At the Gates of the East: British Travel Writers on Bosnia and Herzegovina from the Sixteenth to the Twentieth. Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0880334709.

Evans, Sir Arthur J. (2007). Through Bosnia and the Herzegovina on Foot During the Insurrection, August and September 1875. Cosimo Classics. ISBN 978-1602062702.

External links

Bosnia and Herzegovinaat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary

Media from Wikimedia Commons

News from Wikinews

Quotations from Wikiquote

Texts from Wikisource

Textbooks from Wikibooks

Travel guide from Wikivoyage

Resources from Wikiversity

 Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Bosnia and Herzegovina Corruption Profile from the Business Anti-Corruption Portal

Bosnia and Herzegovina from UCB Libraries GovPubs

Bosnia and Herzegovina at Facebook

Bosnia and Herzegovina at Curlie

Relevant laws of Bosnia and Herzegovina

Bosnia–Hercegovina profile from the BBC News.

 Wikimedia Atlas of Bosnia and Herzegovina

Coordinates: 44°N 18°E / 44°N 18°E / 44; 18

v

t

e

Bosnia and Herzegovina topics

History 
Illyricum

Bosnian Kingdom

Ottoman Bosnia and Herzegovina

Austro-Hungarian Bosnia and Herzegovina

Kingdom of Yugoslavia

World War II

Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia

Socialist Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina

Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina

Bosnian War

Bosnia and Herzegovina

Geography 
Cities

Mountains

Extreme points

Rivers

Lakes

Climate

Protected areas

Fauna

Governance 
Administrative divisions
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina

Republika Srpska

Constitution

Parliament

Politics

Presidency
Chairman

Members

Council of Ministers
Chairman

Elections

Political parties

Foreign relations

Government

Law enforcement

Armed Forces

Economy 
Currency

Central Bank

Communications

Tourism

Transport

Society 
Bosnians (Bosniaks, Croats, Serbs)

Demographics

Ethnic groups

Religion

Languages

Education

Human rights

LGBT rights
LGBT history

Culture 
Architecture

National monuments

Art

Cinema

Music

Cuisine (Ćevapi)

Bosnian language

Literature

Public holidays

Radio

Television

Symbols

National Flag

Coat of arms

Anthem

Decorations and medals

World Heritage Sites

v

t

e

Political divisions of Bosnia and Herzegovina

v

t

e

Entities of Bosnia and Herzegovina

Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina

Republika Srpska

v

t

e

Cantons of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina

 Una-Sana

Central Bosnia

 Posavina

Herzegovina-Neretva

 Tuzla

West Herzegovina

 Zenica-Doboj

Sarajevo

 Bosnian Podrinje

 Canton 10

v

t

e

Districts of Bosnia and Herzegovina

Brčko distrikt

v

t

e

Municipalities and cities in Bosnia and Herzegovina

Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina

Cities 
Bihać

Bugojno

Čapljina

Gračanica

Gradačac

Livno

Ljubuški

Mostar

Sarajevo (capital)

Srebrenik

Široki Brijeg

Tuzla

Visoko

Vitez

Zenica

Živinice

Municipalities 
Banovići

Bosanska Krupa

Bosanski Petrovac

Bosansko Grahovo

Breza

Brčko

Busovača

Bužim

Cazin

Čelić

Čitluk

Drvar

Doboj East

Doboj South

Dobretići

Domaljevac-Šamac

Donji Vakuf

Foča-Ustikolina

Fojnica

Glamoč

Goražde

Gornji Vakuf-Uskoplje

Grude

Hadžići

Ilidža

Ilijaš

Jablanica

Jajce

Kakanj

Kalesija

Kiseljak

Kladanj

Ključ

Konjic

Kreševo

Kupres

Lukavac

Maglaj

Neum

Novi Travnik

Odžak

Olovo

Orašje

Pale-Prača

Posušje

Prozor-Rama

Ravno

Sanski Most

Sapna

Sarajevo
Centar

Novi Grad

Novo Sarajevo

Stari Grad

Stolac

Teočak

Tešanj

Tomislavgrad

Travnik

Trnovo

Usora

Vareš

Velika Kladuša

Vogošća

Zavidovići

Žepče

Republika Srpska

Cities 
Banja Luka

Bijeljina

Doboj

Gradiška

Istočno Sarajevo

Prijedor

Trebinje

Zvornik

Municipalities 
Berkovići

Bileća

Brod

Bratunac

Brčko

Čajniče

Čelinac

Derventa

Donji Žabar

Foča

Gacko

Han Pijesak

Istočni Drvar

Istočni Mostar

Istočno Sarajevo
Istočna Ilidža

Istočno Novo Sarajevo

Istočni Stari Grad

Pale

Sokolac

Trnovo

Jezero

Kalinovik

Kneževo

Kostajnica

Kozarska Dubica

Kotor Varoš

Krupa na Uni

Kupres

Laktaši

Ljubinje

Lopare

Milići

Modriča

Mrkonjić Grad

Nevesinje

Novi Grad

Novo Goražde

Osmaci

Oštra Luka

Pelagićevo

Petrovac

Petrovo

Prnjavor

Ribnik

Rogatica

Rudo

Stanari

Šamac

Šekovići

Šipovo

Srbac

Srebrenica

Teslić

Ugljevik

Višegrad

Vlasenica

Vukosavlje

Articles related to Bosnia and Herzegovina

v

t

e

Balkan Peninsula countries

Geographically fully located 
Albania

Bosnia and Herzegovina

Bulgaria

Kosovo1

Montenegro

North Macedonia

Significantly located 
Serbia

Greece

Croatia

Mostly outside of the peninsula 
Romania

Slovenia

Turkey

See also 
Southeast Europe

History of the Balkans

Balkan languages (Sprachbund)

Balkanization

1 Declared independence from Serbia on 17 February 2008 and is recognised by 112 United Nations member states, while 10 states have recognized Kosovo only to later withdraw their recognition..

v

t

e

Sovereign states and dependencies of Europe

Sovereign states 
Albania

Andorra

Armenia2

Austria

Azerbaijan

Belarus

Belgium

Bosnia and Herzegovina

Bulgaria

Croatia

Cyprus2

Czech Republic

Denmark

Estonia

Finland

France

Georgia

Germany

Greece

Hungary

Iceland1

Ireland

Italy

Kazakhstan

Latvia

Liechtenstein

Lithuania

Luxembourg

Malta

Moldova

Monaco

Montenegro

Netherlands

North Macedonia

Norway

Poland

Portugal

Romania

Russia

San Marino

Serbia

Slovakia

Slovenia

Spain

Sweden

Switzerland

Turkey

Ukraine

United Kingdom

Vatican City

States with limited

recognition

Abkhazia

Artsakh2

Kosovo

Northern Cyprus2

South Ossetia

Transnistria

Dependencies

Denmark 
Faroe Islands1
autonomous country of the Kingdom of Denmark

United Kingdom 
Akrotiri and Dhekelia2
Sovereign Base Areas

Gibraltar
British Overseas Territory

Guernsey

Isle of Man

Jersey
Crown dependencies

Special areas of

internal sovereignty

Finland 
Åland Islands
autonomous region subject to the Åland Convention of 1921

Norway 
Svalbard
unincorporated area subject to the Svalbard Treaty

United Kingdom 
Northern Ireland
country of the United Kingdom subject to the British-Irish Agreement

1 Oceanic islands within the vicinity of Europe are usually grouped with the continent even though they are not situated on its continental shelf.

2 Some countries completely outside the conventional geographical boundaries of Europe are commonly associated with the continent due to ethnological links.

v

t

e

Countries and territories of the Mediterranean Sea

Sovereign states 
Albania

Algeria

Bosnia and Herzegovina

Croatia

Cyprus

Egypt

France

Greece

Israel

Italy

Lebanon

Libya

Malta

Monaco

Montenegro

Morocco

Slovenia

Spain

Syria

Tunisia

Turkey

States with limited recognition 
Northern Cyprus

Palestine

Dependencies and other territories 
Akrotiri and Dhekelia (UK)

Gibraltar (UK)

v

t

e

Council of Europe

Institutions 
Secretary General

Committee of Ministers

Parliamentary Assembly

Congress

Court of Human Rights

Commissioner for Human Rights

Commission for the Efficiency of Justice

Commission against Racism and Intolerance

EU relations

Members 
Albania

Andorra

Armenia

Austria

Azerbaijan

Belgium

Bosnia and Herzegovina

Bulgaria

Croatia

Cyprus

Czech Republic

Denmark

Estonia

Finland

France

Georgia

Germany

Greece

Hungary

Iceland

Ireland

Italy

Latvia

Liechtenstein

Lithuania

Luxembourg

Malta

Moldova

Monaco

Montenegro

Netherlands

North Macedonia

Norway

Poland

Portugal

Romania

Russia

San Marino

Serbia

Slovakia

Slovenia

Spain

Sweden

Switzerland

Turkey

Ukraine

United Kingdom

Observers 
Canada

Holy See

Israel

Japan

Mexico

United States

Sovereign Military Order of Malta

Former members 
Czechoslovakia (1991–1992)

Saar (assoc. 1950–1956)

Serbia and Montenegro (2003–2006)

v

t

e

Enlargement and partners of the European Union

Previous enlargements 
1973

1981

1986

1995

2004

2007

2013

Statistics

Negotiating 
 Albania (status)

 North Macedonia (status)

 Montenegro (status)

 Serbia (status)

 Turkey (status) (relations)

Potential candidates 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina (status)

 Kosovo* (under the Belgrade–Pristina agreement; status)

Partnerships

European Economic Area 
 Iceland (relations)

 Liechtenstein (relations)

 Norway (relations)

 United Kingdom (relations) (until (by default) 31 December 2020) (see Brexit)

Free trade agreements 
 Switzerland (relations)

Eastern Partnership 
 Armenia (relations)

 Azerbaijan (relations)

 Belarus (relations)

 Georgia (relations)

 Moldova (relations)

 Ukraine (relations)

Northern Dimension 
 Russia (relations)

Union for the Mediterranean 
 Algeria

 Egypt (relations)

 Israel (relations)

 Jordan (relations)

 Lebanon (relations)

 Mauritania

 Monaco (relations)

 Morocco (relations)

 Palestine (relations)

 Syria

 Tunisia

Current membership

Criteria

Withdrawal

v

t

e

Members of the Central European Free Trade Agreement

Albania

Bosnia and Herzegovina

UNMIK (on behalf of Kosovo in accordance with UNSCR 1244)

Kosovo/UNMIK

Moldova

Montenegro

North Macedonia

Serbia

v

t

e

Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE)

Members 
Albania

Andorra

Armenia

Austria

Azerbaijan

Belarus

Belgium

Bosnia and Herzegovina

Bulgaria

Canada

Croatia

Cyprus

Czech Republic

Denmark

Estonia

Finland

France

Georgia

Germany

Greece

Holy See

Hungary

Iceland

Ireland

Italy

Kazakhstan

Kyrgyzstan

Latvia

Liechtenstein

Lithuania

Luxembourg

Malta

Moldova

Monaco

Mongolia

Montenegro

Netherlands

North Macedonia

Norway

Poland

Portugal

Romania

Russia

San Marino

Serbia

Slovakia

Slovenia

Spain

Sweden

Switzerland

Tajikistan

Turkey

Turkmenistan

Ukraine

United Kingdom

United States

Uzbekistan

Partners for

Cooperation 
Afghanistan

Algeria

Australia

Egypt

Israel

Japan

Jordan

Morocco

South Korea

Thailand

Tunisia

Bodies and posts 
Parliamentary Assembly

ODIHR

Commissioner on National Minorities

Representative on Freedom of the Media

v

t

e

Non-Aligned Movement

Members 
List of members of Non-Aligned Movement

India and the Non-Aligned Movement

Yugoslavia and the Non-Aligned Movement

Structure

Organizations 
NAM News Network

Principles 
Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence

Summits 
Bandung Conference

Non-Aligned Foreign Ministers Conference

16th Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement

Founders 
Josip Broz Tito (Yugoslavia)

Sukarno (Indonesia)

Jawaharlal Nehru (India)

Kwame Nkrumah (Ghana)

Gamal Abdel Nasser (Egypt)

People 
Houari Boumediene

Fidel Castro

Nelson Mandela

Mohamed Morsi

Nicolás Maduro

v

t

e

Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC)

Members 
Afghanistan

Albania

Algeria

Azerbaijan

Bahrain

Bangladesh

Benin

Burkina Faso

Brunei

Cameroon

Chad

Comoros

Djibouti

Egypt

Gabon

Gambia

Guinea

Guinea-Bissau

Guyana

Indonesia

Iran

Iraq

Ivory Coast

Jordan

Kuwait

Kazakhstan

Kyrgyzstan

Lebanon

Libya

Malaysia

Maldives

Mali

Mauritania

Morocco

Mozambique

Niger

Nigeria

Oman

Pakistan

Palestine

Qatar

Saudi Arabia

Senegal

Sierra Leone

Somalia

Sudan

Suriname

Tajikistan

Turkey

Tunisia

Togo

Turkmenistan

Uganda

Uzbekistan

United Arab Emirates

Yemen

Suspended 
Syria

Observers

Countries

and territories

Bosnia and Herzegovina

Central African Republic

Northern Cyprus1

Russia

Thailand

Muslim

communities

Moro National Liberation Front

International

organizations

Economic Cooperation Organization

African Union

Arab League

Non-Aligned Movement

United Nations

1 As the \"Turkish Cypriot State\".

v

t

e

Republics and autonomous provinces of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia

Bosnia and Herzegovina

Croatia

Montenegro

North Macedonia

Serbia
Vojvodina

Kosovo

Slovenia

Authority control 
BNF: cb11709959t (data)

GND: 4088119-2

HDS: 032206

LCCN: n81035836

MusicBrainz: f2b64f81-6d36-35b3-94b9-5ba53d693914

NARA: 10045294

NDL: 00577605

NKC: ge134079

NLI: 000984370

TDVİA: bosna-hersek

VIAF: 126120141

 WorldCat Identities: lccn-n81035836

"

