"American television series (2008–2013)

Breaking Bad

Genre 
Crime drama

Thriller

Neo-Western

Black comedy

Tragedy

Created by Vince Gilligan

Starring 
Bryan Cranston

Anna Gunn

Aaron Paul

Dean Norris

Betsy Brandt

RJ Mitte

Bob Odenkirk

Giancarlo Esposito

Jonathan Banks

Laura Fraser

Jesse Plemons

Composer(s) Dave Porter

Country of origin United States

Original language(s) 
English

Spanish

No. of seasons 5

No. of episodes 62 (list of episodes)

Production

Executive producer(s) 
Vince Gilligan

Mark Johnson

Michelle MacLaren

Producer(s) 
Stewart A. Lyons

Sam Catlin

John Shiban

Peter Gould

George Mastras

Thomas Schnauz

Melissa Bernstein

Diane Mercer

Bryan Cranston

Moira Walley-Beckett

Karen Moore

Patty Lin

Production location(s) Albuquerque, New Mexico

Cinematography 
Michael Slovis

Reynaldo Villalobos

Arthur Albert

John Toll

Nelson Cragg

Editor(s) 
Kelley Dixon

Skip Macdonald

Chris McCaleb

Sharidan Williams-Sotelo

Lynne Willingham

Running time 43–58 minutes

Production company(s) 
High Bridge Entertainment

Gran Via Productions

Sony Pictures Television

Distributor Sony Pictures Television

Release

Original network AMC

Picture format 
1080p (16:9 HDTV)

4K (Ultra HD)

Audio format Dolby Digital 5.1

Original release January 20, 2008 (2008-01-20) –

September 29, 2013 (2013-09-29)

Chronology

Followed by Better Call Saul

El Camino: A Breaking Bad Movie

Related shows 
Talking Bad

Metástasis

External links

Website

Production website

Breaking Bad is an American neo-Western crime drama television series created and produced by Vince Gilligan. The show aired on AMC from January 20, 2008, to September 29, 2013, consisting of five seasons for a total of 62 episodes. It was set and filmed in Albuquerque, New Mexico, and tells the story of Walter White (Bryan Cranston), an underemployed and depressed high school chemistry teacher who is struggling with a recent diagnosis of stage-three lung cancer. White turns to a life of crime, partnering with his former student Jesse Pinkman (Aaron Paul), by producing and distributing crystallized methamphetamine to secure his family's financial future before he dies, while navigating the dangers of the criminal underworld. The title is a Southern colloquialism meaning to turn to a life of crime. Gilligan characterized the series as showing Walter's transformation from a soft-spoken Mr. Chips into Scarface.

Among the show's co-stars are Anna Gunn and RJ Mitte as Walter's wife Skyler and son Walter, Jr., and Betsy Brandt and Dean Norris as Skyler's sister Marie Schrader and her husband Hank, a DEA agent. Others include Bob Odenkirk as White and Pinkman's sleazy lawyer Saul Goodman, Jonathan Banks as private investigator and fixer Mike Ehrmantraut, and Giancarlo Esposito as drug kingpin Gus Fring. The final season introduces Jesse Plemons as the criminally ambitious Todd Alquist, and Laura Fraser as Lydia Rodarte-Quayle, a clumsy business executive secretly managing Walter's global meth sales for her company.

Breaking Bad's first season received generally positive reviews, while the rest of its run received universal acclaim, which would make critics laud it as one of the greatest television series of all time. It had moderate viewership in its first three seasons, but the fourth and fifth seasons saw a significant rise in viewership when it was made available on Netflix just before the fourth season premiere. By the time that the series finale aired, it was among the most-watched cable shows on American television. The show received numerous awards, including 16 Primetime Emmy Awards, eight Satellite Awards, two Golden Globe Awards, two Peabody Awards, two Critics' Choice Awards, and four Television Critics Association Awards. Cranston won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series four times, while Aaron Paul won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series three times; Anna Gunn won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series twice. In 2013, Breaking Bad entered the Guinness World Records as the most critically acclaimed show of all time.

Better Call Saul, a prequel series featuring Odenkirk, Banks, and Esposito reprising their Breaking Bad roles, debuted on AMC on February 8, 2015, and has been renewed for a final sixth season. The sequel film El Camino: A Breaking Bad Movie starring Aaron Paul was released on Netflix and in theaters on October 11, 2019.

Contents

1 Premise

2 Production

2.1 Conception

2.2 Development history

2.3 Casting

2.4 Scientific accuracy

2.5 Technical aspects

3 Cast and characters

3.1 Main characters

3.2 Recurring characters

3.3 Special guest appearances

4 Episodes

4.1 Season 1 (2008)

4.2 Season 2 (2009)

4.3 Season 3 (2010)

4.4 Season 4 (2011)

4.5 Season 5 (2012–13)

5 Themes and symbols

5.1 Moral consequences

5.2 Devotion to family

5.3 Pink teddy bear

5.4 Walt Whitman

6 Reception and legacy

6.1 Critical reception

6.2 Criticism

6.3 Viewership

6.4 Awards and nominations

7 Retrospective conversations

7.1 Writers reunion

7.2 Rian Johnson's experience on the show

8 Spin-offs and adaptations

8.1 Metástasis

8.2 Better Call Saul

8.3 Talking Bad

8.4 Breaking Bad: Criminal Elements

8.5 The Broken and the Bad

8.6 Fan edit film

8.7 Other

9 Sequel feature film

10 Real-life influence

10.1 Cult following

10.2 Walter White obituary and funeral

10.3 Others

11 References

12 External links

Premise

Set in Albuquerque, New Mexico, between 2008 and 2010, Breaking Bad follows Walter White, a meek high school science teacher who transforms into a ruthless player in the local methamphetamine drug trade, driven by a desire to provide for his family after being diagnosed with terminal lung cancer. Initially making only small batches of meth with his former student Jesse Pinkman in a rolling meth lab, Walter and Jesse eventually expand to make larger batches of a special blue meth that is incredibly pure and creates high demand. Walter takes on the name \"Heisenberg\" to mask his identity. Because of his drug-related activities, Walter eventually finds himself at odds with his family, the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) through his brother-in-law Hank Schrader, the local gangs, the Mexican drug cartels and their regional distributors, putting his life at risk.

Production

Conception

Breaking Bad was created by Vince Gilligan, who spent several years writing the Fox series The X-Files. Gilligan wanted to create a series in which the protagonist became the antagonist. \"Television is historically good at keeping its characters in a self-imposed stasis so that shows can go on for years or even decades,\" he said. \"When I realized this, the logical next step was to think, how can I do a show in which the fundamental drive is toward change?\" He added that his goal with Walter White was to turn him from Mr. Chips into Scarface. Gilligan believed the concept of showing the full drastic transformation of a character across the run of a television show was a risky concept and would be difficult to pitch without other powerful factors to support it, such as strong cinematography and acting.

The show title is a Southern colloquialism meaning, among other things, \"raising hell\", and was chosen by Gilligan to describe Walter's transformation. According to Time entertainment editor Lily Rothman, the term has a broader meaning and is an old phrase which \"connotes more violence than 'raising hell' does ... he words possess a wide variety of nuances: to 'break bad' can mean to 'go wild', to 'defy authority', and break the law, to be verbally 'combative, belligerent, or threatening' or, followed by the preposition 'on', 'to dominate or humiliate'.\"

The concept emerged as Gilligan talked with his fellow X-Files writer Thomas Schnauz regarding their current unemployment and joked that the solution was for them to put a \"meth lab in the back of an RV and  around the country cooking meth and making money\".

After writing the concept for the show and pilot, Gilligan pitched it to Sony Pictures Television, who became very interested in supporting it. Sony arranged for meetings with the various cable networks. Showtime passed on this, as they had already started broadcasting Weeds, a show with similarities to the premise of Breaking Bad. While his producers convinced him that the show was different enough to still be successful, Gilligan later stated that he would not have gone forward with the idea had he known about Weeds earlier. Other networks like HBO and TNT also passed on the idea, but eventually FX took interest and began initial discussions on producing the pilot. At the same time, FX had also started development of Dirt, a female-centric crime-based drama series, and with three existing male-centric shows already on the network, FX passed up Breaking Bad for Dirt.

One of Gilligan's agents spoke to Jeremy Elice, the director of original programming for AMC who was looking for more original shows to add alongside their upcoming Mad Men. Elice was intrigued, and soon a meeting was set up between Gilligan, Elice, and two programming executives. Gilligan was not optimistic about this meeting, fearing they would just put him off, but instead all three showed great interest, and the meeting ended up establishing how AMC would acquire the rights from FX and set the pilot into production. It took about a year following this meeting before Sony had set up the rights with AMC and production could start.

Development history

Breaking Bad was filmed at various locations across Albuquerque. Clockwise from top left: the house used for the Whites' home, the fast food restaurant that was used for Los Pollos Hermanos, the Crosswinds Motels used in-show for various drug deals, a rental home used for Jane's and Jesse's apartment, the car wash where Walter works part-time, and the Doghouse, a functioning drive-in restaurant

The network ordered nine episodes for the first season (including the pilot), but the 2007–08 Writers Guild of America strike limited the production to seven episodes, as well as delaying the start of production for the second season. Within the original nine-episode arc, he had planned to kill off Jesse or Hank, as a \"ballsy\" moment to end the season on. This death was eliminated with the limited episode count, which Gilligan found to be a net positive given the strength of acting that both Paul and Norris brought to these roles through the seasons. The strike also helped to slow down production long enough for Gilligan and his writing team to readjust the pacing of the show, which in the original arc had been moving too quickly. Gould stated that the writer's strike \"saved the show\", as if they had produced the two additional episodes in the first season, they would have gone down a different creative path that he believes would have led to the show's cancellation by its third season.

The initial versions of the script were set in Riverside, California, but at the suggestion of Sony, Albuquerque was chosen for the production's location due to the favorable financial conditions offered by the state of New Mexico. Once Gilligan recognized that this would mean \"we'd always have to be avoiding the Sandia Mountains\" in shots directed toward the east, the story setting was changed to the actual production location. It was shot primarily on 35 mm film, with digital cameras employed as needed for additional angles, point of view shots and time-lapse photography. Breaking Bad cost $3 million per episode to produce, higher than the average cost for a basic cable program.

Around 2010, AMC had expressed to Sony Pictures Television and Gilligan that they felt that the third season would be the last for Breaking Bad. Sony started to shop the show around, having gained quick interest from the FX network for two more seasons, upon which AMC changed its mind and allowed the show to continue. At the same time, Netflix was starting to aggressively shop for content to add to its service, and arranged a deal with Sony for Breaking Bad to be available after the airing of the fourth season. However, knowing that AMC had placed Breaking Bad on a potential cancellation route, Sony pushed to have the show added to the service in time for the fourth season. Because of this, Breaking Bad's viewership grew greatly as viewers binged the series on Netflix, helping to assure that a fifth season could be made. The fifth-season premiere had more than double the viewership compared to the fourth season premiere, attributed to the Netflix availability. Gilligan thanked Netflix at the Emmy Awards in September 2013 after the series' conclusion for the popularity of the series, saying that Netflix \"kept us on the air\".

As the series progressed, Gilligan and the writing staff of Breaking Bad made Walter increasingly unsympathetic. Gilligan said during the run of the series, \"He's going from being a protagonist to an antagonist. We want to make people question who they're pulling for, and why.\" Cranston said by the fourth season, \"I think Walt's figured out it's better to be a pursuer than the pursued. He's well on his way to badass.\"

In July 2011, Vince Gilligan indicated that he intended to conclude Breaking Bad at the end of its fifth season. In early August 2011, negotiations began over a deal regarding the fifth and possible final season between the network AMC and Sony Pictures Television, the production company of the series. AMC proposed a shortened fifth season (six to eight episodes, instead of 13) to cut costs, but the producers declined. Sony then approached other cable networks about possibly picking up the show if a deal could not be made. On August 14, 2011, AMC renewed the series for a fifth and final season consisting of 16 episodes. However in April 2012, Bryan Cranston revealed that the fifth season would be split into two halves, with the first eight episodes airing in 2012, and the final eight in 2013.

Before the series finale, Gilligan said that it was difficult to write for Walter White because the character was so dark and morally questionable: \"I'm going to miss the show when it's over, but on some level, it'll be a relief to not have Walt in my head anymore.\" Gilligan later said the idea for Walter's character intrigued him so much that he \"didn't really give much thought on how well it would sell\", stating that he would have given up on the premise since it was \"such an odd, dark story\" that could have difficulties being pitched to studios. Ultimately, Gilligan chose to end Breaking Bad with Walter's death, occurring in-story two years after he had been first been diagnosed with cancer and given two years to live. Gilligan said by the end of the series, \"it feels as if we should adhere to our promise that we explicitly made to our audience\" from the first episode.

Casting

\"You're going to see that underlying humanity, even when he's making the most devious, terrible decisions, and you need someone who has that humanity – deep down, bedrock humanity – so you say, watching this show, 'All right, I'll go for this ride. I don't like what he's doing, but I understand, and I'll go with it for as far as it goes.' If you don't have a guy who gives you that, despite the greatest acting chops in the world, the show is not going to succeed.\"

—Vince Gilligan, about Bryan Cranston

Breaking Bad creator Vince Gilligan cast Bryan Cranston for the role of Walter White based on having worked with him in the \"Drive\" episode of the science fiction television series The X-Files, on which Gilligan worked as a writer. Cranston played an anti-Semite with a terminal illness who took series co-protagonist Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) hostage. Gilligan said the character had to be simultaneously loathsome and sympathetic, and that \"Bryan alone was the only actor who could do that, who could pull off that trick. And it is a trick. I have no idea how he does it.\" AMC officials, who were initially reluctant with the casting choice, having known Cranston only as the over-the-top character Hal on the comedy series Malcolm in the Middle, approached actors John Cusack and Matthew Broderick about the role. When both actors declined, the executives were persuaded to cast Cranston after seeing his X-Files episode.

Cranston contributed significantly to the formation and development of the Walter White persona. When Gilligan left much of Walter's past unexplained during the development of the series, the actor wrote his own backstory for the character. At the start of the show, Cranston gained 10 pounds to reflect the character's personal decline, and had the natural red highlights of his hair dyed brown. He collaborated with costume designer Kathleen Detoro on a wardrobe of mostly neutral green and brown colors to make the character bland and unremarkable, and worked with makeup artist Frieda Valenzuela to create a mustache he described as \"impotent\" and like a \"dead caterpillar\". Cranston repeatedly identified elements in certain scripts where he disagreed with how the character was handled, and went so far as to call Gilligan directly when he could not work out disagreements with the episode's screenwriters. Cranston has said he was inspired partially by his elderly father for how Walter carries himself physically, which he described as \"a little hunched over, never erect,  the weight of the world is on this man's shoulders.\" In contrast to his character, Cranston has been described as extremely playful on set, with Aaron Paul describing him as \"a kid trapped in a man's body\".

Aaron Paul's casting was also initially questioned by production, as Paul looked too old and too much like a \"pretty boy\" to be associated with meth cooking. However, Gilligan reconsidered Paul's skills after seeing his audition and recalling he had also had guest starred on The X-Files episode \"Lord of the Flies\". Gilligan originally intended for Pinkman to be killed at the end of Breaking Bad's first season in a botched drug deal as a plot device to plague Walter White with guilt. However, Gilligan said by the second episode of the season, he was so impressed with Paul's performance that \"it became pretty clear early on that would be a huge, colossal mistake, to kill off Jesse\". Similarly, Dean Norris had shown his ability to be a law enforcement official in The X-Files episode \"F. Emasculata\", and was brought on to be Hank Schrader, Walter's brother-in-law and DEA agent.

Scientific accuracy

Donna Nelson, a professor of organic chemistry at the University of Oklahoma, checked scripts and provided dialogue. She also drew chemical structures and wrote chemical equations which were used as props. According to creator Vince Gilligan,

Dr. Donna Nelson from the University of Oklahoma approached us several seasons back and said, \"I really like this show, and if you ever need help with the chemistry, I'd love to lend a hand.\" She's been a wonderful advisor. We get help wherever we need it, whether it's chemistry, electrical engineering, or physics. We try to get everything correct. There's no full-time  on set, but we run certain scenes by these experts first.

\"Because Walter White was talking to his students, I was able to dumb down certain moments of description and dialogue in the early episodes which held me until we had some help from some honest-to-God chemists,\" says Gilligan. According to Gilligan, Nelson \"vets our scripts to make sure our chemistry dialogue is accurate and up to date. We also have a chemist with the Drug Enforcement Administration based out of Dallas who has just been hugely helpful to us.\" Nelson spoke of Gilligan's interest in having the science right, saying that Gilligan \"said it made a difference to him.\"

Several episodes of Mythbusters featured attempts to validate or disprove scenes from Breaking Bad, often with Gilligan guest-starring in the episode to participate. In 2013, two scenes from the first season of Breaking Bad were put under scrutiny in a Mythbusters Breaking Bad special. Despite several modifications to what was seen in the show, both the scenes depicted in the show were shown to be physically impossible. It was shown impossible to use hydrofluoric acid to fully dissolve metal, flesh, or ceramic as shown in the episode \"Cat's in the Bag...\", and that while it was possible to throw fulminated mercury against the floor to cause an explosion, as in the episode \"Crazy Handful of Nothin'\", Walter would have needed a much larger quantity of the compound and thrown at a much faster speed, and likely would have killed all in the room. A later Mythbusters episode, \"Blow It Out of the Water\", tested the possibility of mounting an automated machine gun in a car as in the series finale \"Felina\", and found it plausible. An episode of Mythbusters Jr. proved that it was impossible for an electromagnet to draw metallic objects from across a room as in the episode \"Live Free or Die\".

Jason Wallach of Vice magazine commended the accuracy of the cooking methods presented in the series. In early episodes, a once common clandestine route, the Nagai red phosphorus/iodine method, is depicted, which uses pseudoephedrine as a precursor to d-(+)-methamphetamine. By the season 1 finale, Walt chooses to use a different synthetic route based on the difficulty of acquiring enough pseudoephedrine to produce on the larger scale required. The new method Walt chooses is a reductive amination reaction, relying on phenyl-2-propanone and methylamine. On the show, the phenyl-2-propanone (otherwise known as phenylacetone or P2P) is produced from phenylacetic acid and acetic acid using a tube furnace and thorium dioxide (ThO2) as a catalyst, as mentioned in episodes \"A No Rough-Stuff-Type Deal\" and \"Más\". P2P and methylamine form an imine intermediate; reduction of this P2P-methylamine imine intermediate is performed using mercury aluminum amalgam, as shown in several episodes including \"Hazard Pay\".

One of the important plot points in the series is that the crystal meth Walter \"cooks\" has very long crystals, is very pure, and (despite its purity) has a strong cyan blue color. Truly ultra-pure crystal meth would tend to be clear or white.

In their article \"Die Chemie bei Breaking Bad\" on Chemie in unserer Zeit (translated into English on ChemistryViews as \"The Chemistry of Breaking Bad\"), Tunga Salthammer and Falk Harnish discuss the plausibility of the chemistry portrayed in certain scenes. According to the two, chemistry is clearly depicted as a manufacturing science without much explanation of analytical methods being provided. On the other hand, serious scientific subjects are mixed into the dialogue in order to show a world where chemistry plays a key role.

Technical aspects

Michael Slovis was the cinematographer of Breaking Bad beginning with the second season and he received critical acclaim for his work throughout the series. Critics appreciated the bold visual style adopted by the TV series. Although series creator Vince Gilligan and Slovis wanted to shoot Breaking Bad in CinemaScope, Sony and AMC did not grant them permission. Gilligan cited Sergio Leone's Westerns as a reference for how he wanted the series to look. For his work, he received four Primetime Emmy Award nominations for Outstanding Cinematography for a One Hour Series and Outstanding Cinematography for a Single-Camera Series.

Breaking Bad was shot on 35 mm movie film because of the robustness of the equipment and to keep a focus on shooting scenes economically. Also it allows a later digital transfer to 4K Ultra HD resolution. By the end of the fifth season, episodes had cost upwards of US$6 million to produce.

Kelley Dixon was one of the few editors of Breaking Bad and edited many of the series' \"meth montages\". For the montages, she would use techniques such as jump cuts and alternating the speed of the film, either faster or slower. For her work, she received six Primetime Emmy Award nominations for Outstanding Single-Camera Picture Editing for a Drama Series and won the award in 2013.

Cast and characters

Main article: List of Breaking Bad and Better Call Saul characters

Breaking Bad cast and crew (left to right): creator Vince Gilligan, RJ Mitte (Walter Jr.), Aaron Paul (Jesse Pinkman), Anna Gunn (Skyler White), Bryan Cranston (Walter White), Dean Norris (Hank Schrader), and producer Mark Johnson

Main characters

Bryan Cranston as Walter White – a chemistry teacher who, shortly after his 50th birthday, is diagnosed with Stage III lung cancer and turns to making meth to secure his family's finances. As his shady business progresses, Walter gains a notorious reputation under the name of \"Heisenberg\". Cranston stated that, though he enjoyed doing comedy, he decided he ... should really focus on doing something else. But I think any good drama worth its weight always has a sprinkling of comedy in it, because you can ease the tension to an audience when it's necessary, and then build it back up again. Walt White has no clue he's occasionally funny, but as an actor, I recognize when there are comedic moments and opportunities.

Anna Gunn as Skyler White – Walter's wife who was pregnant with their second child before his diagnosis and who becomes increasingly suspicious of her husband after he begins behaving in unfamiliar ways. Gunn sees Skyler as \"grounded, tough, smart and driven\". Gunn sees Skyler's stalled writing career as her biggest dream, saying, \"I think she really deep down yearns to be an artist and to be creative and productive.\"

Aaron Paul as Jesse Pinkman – Walter's cooking partner and former student. Paul sees Jesse as a funny kid. \"He's just this lost soul – I don't think he's a bad kid, he just got mixed in the wrong crowd.\" Paul elaborated on the character's background, saying, \"He doesn't come from an abusive, alcoholic background. But maybe he just didn't relate to his father, maybe his father was too strict and too proper for Jesse.\" Paul compared the character's relationship with Walt to The Odd Couple.

Dean Norris as Hank Schrader – Marie's husband, Walter and Skyler's brother-in-law and a DEA agent. At the beginning of the series, Hank was intended to be the \"comic relief\". Norris, who has played several policemen before in film and television, stated: Having played so many cops, I've talked with a lot of technical advisers, so I've been able to pick up a lot. Coincidentally, one of my best friends growing up is a cop in Chicago, and one of my other best friends out in LA is a sheriff. So I get to see all the components of that culture.

Betsy Brandt as Marie Schrader – Skyler's sister and Hank's kleptomaniac wife. Brandt described Marie as \"an unpleasant bitch\", but also stated there was more to her than that. \"I think we're seeing more of it now that she would be there for her family. But it's all about her.\"

RJ Mitte as Walter White, Jr. – Walter and Skyler's son, who has cerebral palsy. He begins lashing out after Walter's cancer announcement. Like Walter Jr., Mitte has cerebral palsy, although his is a milder form. Mitte stated he had to regress from his therapy to portray the character, staying up late into the night to slur his speech and learning to walk on crutches so his walking would not look fake.

Bob Odenkirk as Saul Goodman (recurring season 2, main cast season 3–5) – a crooked strip mall lawyer who represents Walt and Jesse. Odenkirk drew inspiration for Goodman from film producer Robert Evans. I thought about Robert Evans because I've listened to The Kid Stays in the Picture on CD. He's constantly switching up his cadence and his delivery. He emphasizes interesting words. He has loads of attitude in almost every line that he says. So when I rehearse the scenes alone I do my impersonation of Robert Evans to find those moments and turns. Then I go out and I do Saul.

Giancarlo Esposito as Gustavo \"Gus\" Fring (recurring season 2, main cast season 3–4) – a Chilean high-level drug distributor who has a cover as an owner of the fast-food chain Los Pollos Hermanos. Esposito stated that for the third season, he incorporated his yoga training in his performance. Gus is the coolest cucumber that ever walked the Earth. I think about Eddie Olmos way back in Miami Vice. He was like dead – he was hardly breathing. I thought, how is this guy just standing in this fire and doing nothing? Gus has totally allowed me that level of flexibility and relaxation – not because he has ultimate power and he knows he can take someone's life. He's just confident.

Jonathan Banks as Mike Ehrmantraut (guest star season 2, main cast season 3–5: part 1) – works for Gus as an all-purpose cleaner and hitman, and also works for Saul as a private investigator. The character of Mike has been compared to Harvey Keitel's Winston Wolf character in Pulp Fiction, which Banks says he is not trying to emulate: \"I immediately tried to put it out of my mind, quite honestly. His cleaner ain't my cleaner. But throughout this world, you would suspect there had been a great many cleaners, whether government-run or individual contractors.\"

Laura Fraser as Lydia Rodarte-Quayle (recurring season 5: part 1, main cast season 5: part 2) – a high-ranking employee of Madrigal Electromotive and a former associate of Gus Fring. She reluctantly begins supplying Walt and Jesse with methylamine and helps Walt expand his operation overseas.

Jesse Plemons as Todd Alquist (recurring season 5: part 1, main cast season 5: part 2) – an employee of Vamonos Pest Control who becomes an associate of Walt and Jesse.

Recurring characters

Steven Michael Quezada as Steven \"Gomey\" Gomez – Hank's DEA partner and best friend who assists in tracking down and learning the identity of Heisenberg. In comical situations between him and Hank, Gomez serves as the \"straight man\".

Matt Jones as Brandon \"Badger\" Mayhew – Jesse's dimwitted friend and junkie, who often serves as the series' comic relief.

Charles Baker as Skinny Pete – A friend of Jesse and a fellow pusher.

Rodney Rush as Christian \"Combo\" Ortega – Also a friend of Jesse and a fellow pusher.

Jessica Hecht and Adam Godley as Gretchen and Elliott Schwartz – Co-owners of Gray Matter, a company that they co-founded alongside Walter, who left the business prior to its major success. Gretchen was a former flame of Walt's and partially the reason he left.

Raymond Cruz as Tuco Salamanca – A sociopathic Mexican drug kingpin who becomes Walt and Jesse's meth distributor.

Mark Margolis as Hector Salamanca – A former high-ranking member of the Juarez Cartel who is now unable to walk or speak because of a stroke, communicating with the help of a bell. He is the uncle of Tuco, Marco, and Leonel Salamanca.

Christopher Cousins as Ted Beneke – Skyler's boss and president of Beneke Fabricators who begins developing financial issues, resulting in an intervention from Skyler.

Krysten Ritter as Jane Margolis – Jesse's apartment manager and girlfriend, who is a recovering addict.

John de Lancie as Donald Margolis – Jane Margolis' father, an air traffic controller.

David Costabile as Gale Boetticher – A chemist hired by Gus Fring to work alongside Walter.

Daniel Moncada and Luis Moncada as Leonel and Marco Salamanca – Two ruthless and taciturn hitmen for the Juarez Cartel who are the cousins of Tuco Salamanca and the nephews of Hector Salamanca.

Emily Rios as Andrea Cantillo – Jesse's second girlfriend, who is also a recovering addict. She has a young son named Brock.

Jeremiah Bitsui as Victor – A loyal henchman to Gus who serves as his enforcer along with Mike.

Ray Campbell as Tyrus Kitt – Gus's enforcer along with Mike during season 4.

Lavell Crawford as Huell Babineaux – Saul's bodyguard who also handles problems Walter needs fixing.

Tina Parker as Francesca Liddy – Saul Goodman's receptionist.

Bill Burr as Patrick Kuby – A hired con man of Saul's who handles various sensitive tasks involving verbal intimidation, coercion, and misdirection.

Michael Bowen as Jack Welker – Todd's uncle and the leader of the Aryan Brotherhood, a white supremacist gang.

Kevin Rankin as Kenny – Jack's second-in-command.

Special guest appearances

Danny Trejo as Tortuga – A Mexican cartel member and DEA informant.

DJ Qualls as Getz – An Albuquerque police officer who brings Badger into police custody, prompting Walt to turn to Saul Goodman.

Jim Beaver as Lawson – An Albuquerque arms dealer who obtains several guns for Walt.

Steven Bauer as Don Eladio Vuente – The leader of the Juarez Cartel who has a history with Gus.

Robert Forster as Ed Galbraith – A vacuum cleaner repairman whose undercover business is a new identity specialist.

Charlie Rose as himself.

Episodes

Main article: List of Breaking Bad episodes

SeasonEpisodesOriginally aired

First airedLast airedNetwork

1 7 January 20, 2008 (2008-01-20) March 9, 2008 (2008-03-09) AMC

2 13 March 8, 2009 (2009-03-08) May 31, 2009 (2009-05-31)

3 13 March 21, 2010 (2010-03-21) June 13, 2010 (2010-06-13)

4 13 July 17, 2011 (2011-07-17) October 9, 2011 (2011-10-09)

5 16 8 July 15, 2012 (2012-07-15) September 2, 2012 (2012-09-02)

8 August 11, 2013 (2013-08-11) September 29, 2013 (2013-09-29)

Film October 11, 2019 (2019-10-11) Netflix

The complete series was released on DVD and Blu-ray on November 26, 2013, in a collectable box shaped like one of the barrels used by Walt to bury his money. The set contains various features, including a two-hour documentary and a humorous alternative ending that features Cranston and his Malcolm in the Middle co-star Jane Kaczmarek playing their characters Hal and Lois, in a nod to the final scene from Newhart.

Season 1 (2008)

Main article: Breaking Bad (season 1)

The first season was originally intended to be nine episodes, but due to the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike only seven episodes were filmed. It ran from January 20 to March 9, 2008.

Walter, diagnosed with inoperable lung cancer, conspires with Jesse to cook methamphetamine (\"meth\") as a way to pay for his treatment and provide financial security for his family. Jesse secures a recreational vehicle to cook in, while Walter devises a production route using unregulated chemicals, creating a highly pure product tinted blue. After a run-in with the Mexican drug cartel, Walter adopts the name \"Heisenberg\", with his \"blue sky\" meth his signature product. Hank and the DEA become aware of this new figure in the drug trade and begin their investigation.

Season 2 (2009)

Main article: Breaking Bad (season 2)

Jesse's dealers become unsafe, and Walter hires a corrupt lawyer Saul to connect them to a high profile drug dealer Gus as a buyer for their latest batch. Jesse dates his apartment manager Jane, and she relapses on heroin; Jesse becomes unreliable. Walter refuses to pay him his half of the sale to Gus, but Jane blackmails Walter. Walter returns to Jesse to apologize, but allows an unconscious Jane to choke on her own vomit. With Jesse in rehab, Walter seems content until he witnesses a midair collision of two planes, a result of Jane's father, an air-traffic controller, becoming distraught over her death while on the job.

Season 3 (2010)

Main article: Breaking Bad (season 3)

On April 2, 2009, AMC announced that Breaking Bad was renewed for a third, 13-episode season. It premiered on March 21, 2010, and concluded on June 13, 2010. The complete third season was released on Region 1 DVD and Region A Blu-ray on June 7, 2011.

Gus offers Walter a job cooking meth at a hidden lab. Walter demands Jesse to be his assistant rather than Gus' choice of Gale. Skyler learns of Walter's meth cooking and demands a divorce. Hank's investigation leads him to Jesse, but he finds no evidence and assaults Jesse, forcing him into a short leave. Hank is forewarned about an attack from two assassins, and kills them but he becomes paralyzed in the aftermath. Jesse's behavior becomes erratic, and Gus replaces him with Gale. Later, Walter fears Gus will kill him and Jesse once Gale learns enough about their methods, and instructs Jesse to kill Gale.

Season 4 (2011)

Main article: Breaking Bad (season 4)

On June 14, 2010, AMC announced Breaking Bad was renewed for a fourth, 13-episode season. Production began in January 2011, the season premiered on July 17, 2011, and concluded on October 9, 2011. Originally, mini episodes of four minutes in length were to be produced before the premiere of the fourth season, but these did not come to fruition.

Gus tightens security at the lab after Gale's death. Gus and Mike work to drive a wedge between Walter and Jesse, seeking to coerce Jesse to be their solitary cook by capturing Walter while at the same time eliminating the Mexican cartel. Skyler accepts Walter's meth cooking, and works with Saul to launder his earnings. Hank, while recovering, tracks Gale's death to Gus and the drug trade. Gus releases Walter and plans to kill Hank. Walter tricks Jesse into turning against Gus, and convinces Hector to detonate a pipe bomb in the same room as Gus, killing them both.

Season 5 (2012–13)

Main article: Breaking Bad (season 5)

On August 14, 2011, AMC announced that Breaking Bad was renewed for a fifth and final season consisting of 16 episodes. Season five is split into two parts, each consisting of 8 episodes. The first half premiered on July 15, 2012, while the second half premiered on August 11, 2013. In August 2013, AMC released a trailer promoting the premiere of final season with Bryan Cranston reading the poem \"Ozymandias\" by Percy Bysshe Shelley, over timelapse shots of Breaking Bad locations.

After the death of Gus, Walter, Jesse, and Mike start a new meth business. When their accomplice Todd kills a child witness during their theft of methylamine, Jesse and Mike sell their share to Declan. Walter produces meth for Declan, and Gus' former associate Lydia starts distribution in Europe, which is so successful that Walter earns US$80 million, which he buries on the Tohajiilee Indian Reservation. Hank attempts to prove Walter is Heisenberg. Walter kills Mike when he demands his share of the money and hires Jack's gang to kill Mike's associates and Jesse. The gang turns on Walter, kills Hank, captures Jesse, and takes most of Walter's money. Walter uses the remainder to escape to New Hampshire.

Walter intends to surrender, but changes course after Elliott and Gretchen minimize his involvement in starting Gray Matter. He leaves his money in a trust which Elliott and Gretchen would administer for his children. He confesses to Skyler that he dealt drugs because he liked it. At Jack's compound, Walter kills Jack and the rest of his gang with a remote controlled machine gun and frees the imprisoned Jesse, who kills Todd. Wounded in the aftermath, he asks Jesse to kill him, but Jesse refuses and departs. Walter reminisces in Jack's meth lab and eventually dies.

Themes and symbols

Moral consequences

In an interview with The New York Times, creator Vince Gilligan said the larger lesson of the series is that \"actions have consequences\". He elaborated on the show's philosophy:

If religion is a reaction of man, and nothing more, it seems to me that it represents a human desire for wrongdoers to be punished. I hate the idea of Idi Amin living in Saudi Arabia for the last 25 years of his life. That galls me to no end. I feel some sort of need for Biblical atonement, or justice, or something. I like to believe there is some comeuppance, that karma kicks in at some point, even if it takes years or decades to happen. My girlfriend says this great thing that's become my philosophy as well. 'I want to believe there's a heaven. But I can't not believe there's a hell.'

In a piece comparing the show to The Sopranos, Mad Men and The Wire, Chuck Klosterman said that Breaking Bad is \"built on the uncomfortable premise that there's an irrefutable difference between what's right and what's wrong, and it's the only one where the characters have real control over how they choose to live\". Klosterman added that the central question of Breaking Bad is: \"What makes a man 'bad' – his actions, his motives, or his conscious decision to be a bad person?\" Klosterman concluded that, in the world of Breaking Bad, \"goodness and badness are simply complicated choices, no different than anything else\".

Ross Douthat of The New York Times, in a response to Klosterman's piece, compared Breaking Bad and The Sopranos, stating that both series are \"morality plays\" that are \"both interested in moral agency\". Douthat went on to say that Walter White and Tony Soprano \"represent mirror-image takes on the problem of evil, damnation, and free will\". Walter is a man who \"deliberately abandons the light for the darkness\" while Tony is \"someone born and raised in darkness\" who turns down \"opportunity after opportunity to claw his way upward to the light\".

Devotion to family

The show explores most of the main characters' connections to their families in great detail. Walt justifies his decision to cook crystal meth and become a criminal because of his desire to provide for his family. In the third season he tries to exit the business because it has driven Skyler to leave him. Gus convinces him to stay, telling him it is a man's job to provide for his family, even if he is unloved. In the final episode of the series, however, Walt finally admits to Skyler that the main motivation for his endeavors in the meth business was his own interest, in spite of secretly securing the $9.72 million he had managed to salvage for her and the children. Jesse's loneliness in the early seasons of the show can be partly explained by his parents' decision to kick him out of their home due to his drug-related activities. This parental disconnect brings him closer to Jane, whose father berates her for her drug use. When Walt crosses paths with Jane's father, Walt refers to Jesse as his nephew and laments the fact that he cannot get through to him. Jane's father responds by telling him to keep trying, saying, \"Family. You can't give up on them, ever. What else is there?\" Jane's subsequent death, which Walt purposefully did not prevent, is a major factor in her father causing the airliner crash at the end of the second season.

Even the show's more hardened characters maintain ties to family. In the second season, Tuco Salamanca spends time caring for his physically disabled uncle, Hector. When Tuco is killed by Hank, his cousins vow revenge. Their actions are further explained in a flashback, where Hector explains to the brothers that \"La familia es todo\" (\"Family is everything\"). Gustavo Fring's franchise Los Pollos Hermanos translates to \"The Chicken Brothers\". This refers to the fact that the company was co-founded by Gus and a man named Max, with whom he shared a close personal connection. When Max is killed by Hector Salamanca, Gus vows to destroy the Salamanca family. In the first part of the fifth season, it is explained that Mike Ehrmantraut's intentions for being in this business were to provide for his granddaughter's future, and by his final episode he is conflicted when having to leave her in a park by herself once he has been warned that the police are onto him. During the second part of the fifth season, white supremacist Jack Welker says \"don't skimp on family\", and he lets Walt live after capturing him in the desert because of love for his nephew Todd Alquist, who has great respect for Walt. Lydia Rodarte-Quayle repeatedly demands that if Mike insists on killing her, that he leave her in her apartment so her daughter can find her, fearful she will think Lydia abandoned her. Much like Walt and Mike, Lydia seems to engage in the meth business in order to provide for her daughter, with actress Laura Fraser stating in an interview that Lydia's daughter is important to how \"Lydia justified what she did to herself\".

Pink teddy bear

The pink teddy bear as seen during the second season

A motif within the second season is the image of a damaged teddy bear and its missing eye. The teddy bear first appears at the end of the music video \"Fallacies\" for Jesse's band \"TwaüghtHammër\", which was released as a webisode in February 2009 leading to the second season. The teddy bear can also be spotted on the mural on Jane's bedroom wall during the final episode of the second season, further connecting the crash to Jane. It is seen in flashforwards during four episodes, the titles of which, when put together in order, form the sentence \"Seven Thirty-Seven down over ABQ\". The flashforwards are shot in black and white, with the sole exception of the pink teddy bear, which is an homage to the film Schindler's List, in which the color red is used to distinguish a little girl in a coat. At the end of the season, Walter indirectly helps cause the midair collision of two airplanes; the pink teddy bear is then revealed to have fallen out of one of the planes and into the Whites' swimming pool. Vince Gilligan called the plane accident an attempt to visualize \"all the terrible grief that Walt has wrought upon his loved ones\" and \"the judgment of God\".

In the first episode of the third season, Walt finds the teddy bear's missing eye in the pool skimmer. Television critic Myles McNutt has called it \"a symbol of the damage  feels responsible for\", and The A.V. Club commented that \"the pink teddy bear continues to accuse\". Fans and critics have compared the appearance of the teddy bear's face to an image of Gus Fring's face in the fourth-season finale.

The teddy bear prop was auctioned off, among other memorabilia, on September 29, 2013, the air date of the show finale.

Walt Whitman

Walter White's name is reminiscent of the poet Walt Whitman. During the series, Gale Boetticher gives Walt a copy of Whitman's Leaves of Grass. Prior to giving this gift, Boetticher recites \"When I Heard the Learn'd Astronomer\". In the episode \"Bullet Points\", Hank finds the initials W.W. written in Boetticher's notes, and jokes with Walt that they are his initials, although Walt indicates that they must refer to Whitman.

In the episode \"Hazard Pay\", Walt finds the copy of Leaves of Grass as he is packing up his bedroom, briefly smiles and leaves it out to read. This occurs at an especially high point in his life, where he feels that things are coming together and he is succeeding in all his ventures. A poem in the book, \"Song of Myself\", is based on many of these same feelings, furthering the connection between Walt's life and Whitman's poetry. The mid-season finale of season five, \"Gliding Over All\", is titled after poem 271 of Leaves of Grass. In the episode, Hank finds Leaves of Grass in Walt's bathroom and opens it to the cover page, where he reads the hand-written inscription: \"To my other favorite W.W. It's an honour working with you. Fondly G.B.\" Upon reading this, Hank becomes visibly shocked, realizing the truth about Walter for the first time, which provides the opening premise for the second half of the final season.

Reception and legacy

Critical reception

Metacritic and Rotten Tomatoes scores per season

Breaking Bad received widespread critical acclaim and has been praised by many critics as one of the greatest television shows of all time. On the review aggregator website Metacritic, the first season scored 73 out of 100, the second 84 out of 100, the third 89 out of 100, the fourth 96 out of 100, and the fifth 99 out of 100. The American Film Institute listed Breaking Bad as one of the top ten television series of 2008, 2010, 2011, 2012 and 2013. In 2013, TV Guide ranked it as the ninth greatest TV series of all time. By its end, the series was among the most-watched cable shows on American television, with audience numbers doubling from the fourth season to the fifth. A 2015 survey by The Hollywood Reporter of 2,800 actors, producers, directors, and other industry people named Breaking Bad as their #2 favorite show. In 2016, Rolling Stone ranked it third on its list of 100 Greatest TV Shows of All Time.

For the first season, the series saw a generally positive reception. New York Post critic Linda Stasi praised the series, particularly the acting of Cranston and Paul, stating \"Cranston and Paul are so good, it's astounding. I'd say the two have created great chemistry, but I'm ashamed to say such a cheap thing.\" Robert Bianco of USA Today also praised Cranston and Paul, exclaiming \"There is humor in the show, mostly in Walt's efforts to impose scholarly logic on the business and on his idiot apprentice, a role Paul plays very well. But even their scenes lean toward the suspenseful, as the duo learns that killing someone, even in self-defense, is ugly, messy work.\"

The second season saw critical acclaim. Entertainment Weekly critic Ken Tucker stated \"Bad is a superlatively fresh metaphor for a middle-age crisis: It took cancer and lawbreaking to jolt Walt out of his suburban stupor, to experience life again—to take chances, risk danger, do things he didn't think himself capable of doing. None of this would work, of course, without Emmy winner Cranston's ferocious, funny selflessness as an actor. For all its bleakness and darkness, there's a glowing exhilaration about this series: It's a feel-good show about feeling really bad.\" San Francisco Chronicle's Tim Goodman claimed \"The first three episodes of Season 2 that AMC sent out continue that level of achievement with no evident missteps. In fact, it looks as if Gilligan's bold vision for Breaking Bad, now duly rewarded against all odds, has invigorated everyone involved in the project. You can sense its maturity and rising ambition in each episode.\" Horror novelist Stephen King lauded the series, comparing it to the likes of Twin Peaks and Blue Velvet.

From left to right: Josh Sapan (AMC president and CEO), Aaron Paul (Jesse Pinkman), Vince Gilligan (creator), Bryan Cranston (Walter White) and Charlie Collier (President, general manager)

The third season also saw critical acclaim. Time proclaimed, \"It's a drama that has chosen the slow burn over the flashy explosion, and it's all the hotter for that choice.\" Newsday stated Breaking Bad was still TV's best series and it stayed true to itself. Tim Goodman praised the writing, acting, and cinematography, pointing out the \"visual adventurousness\" of the series. Goodman went on to call the show's visuals \"a combination of staggering beauty – the directors make use of numerous wide-angle landscape portraits – and transfixing weirdness.\" After the finale aired, The A.V. Club said that season three was \"one of television's finest dramatic accomplishments. And what makes it so exciting – what makes the recognition of the current golden age so pressing – is that the season has not been, as  put it in another context, 'television good.' The heart-in-the-throat quality of this season comes as much from the writers' exhilarating disregard for television conventions as from the events portrayed.\"

Season four won near-universal critical acclaim. The Boston Globe referred to the show as a \"taut exercise in withheld disaster\" and declared the show \"riveting\". The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette labeled the series \"smart and thought provoking that elevates the artistic achievements of the medium\". Season four was listed by many critics as one of the best seasons of television in 2011. Time listed Walter White's \"I am the one who knocks\" line as one of the best television lines of 2011. The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette listed it as the best series of 2011 while noting that \"Breaking Bad is that rare TV series that has never made a seriously damaging storytelling misstep.\" The A.V. Club's review of the finale summed it up as a \"fantastically fitting end for a season that ran in slow motion, starting and continuing with so many crises begging for resolution week after week. Now the decks are cleared, but that doesn't mean anybody is home free. Nothing's ever easy on Breaking Bad.\" The reviewer continued to exalt the season, and proclaimed, \"What a season of television – truly something none of us could ever have expected, or claimed we deserved.\"

Both halves of the fifth season received overwhelming critical acclaim. Following the end of the series, critic Nick Harley summarized his commendation of the show: \"Expertly written, virtuosic with its direction, and flawlessly performed, Breaking Bad is everything you could want in a drama. Critics will spend the next decade dissecting and arguing about what made it great, but the reasons are endless and already well documented.\" During the final season, the show also received praise from George R. R. Martin, author of the A Song of Ice and Fire novels, particularly the episode \"Ozymandias\"; Martin commented that \"Walter White is a bigger monster than anyone in Westeros.\" In his review of the second half of season 5, Seth Amitin of IGN stated, \"This final batch of Breaking Bad is one of the best run of episodes TV has ever offered,\" and praised \"Ozymandias\" in particular, referring to it as \"maybe the best episode of TV  ever seen\". Jonah Goldberg of National Review called it \"the best show currently on television, and perhaps even the best ever\". The veteran actor Sir Anthony Hopkins wrote a letter of praise to Bryan Cranston, telling him that his \"performance as Walter White was the best acting I have seen – ever\". He lauded the rest of the cast and crew as well. The letter first appeared on Steven Michael Quezada's (who portrayed DEA Agent Steven Gomez) Facebook page, and in spite of it being taken down, the letter soon went viral. In 2013, Guinness World Records named Breaking Bad the highest-rated TV series of all time, citing its season 5 Metacritic score of 99 out of 100.

Criticism

Breaking Bad has been accused by some members of law enforcement and the legal community of normalizing or glorifying methamphetamine usage. Some point to statistics suggesting that meth usage was at a low point in 2006, just before the series premiered, but that it has increased since then; however, it is more likely that it was because in 2006 federal laws were passed making it harder to acquire the chemical precursors for making methamphetamine.

Viewership

Breaking Bad premiered on the same night as both the NFC and AFC Championships in the 2008 NFL playoffs, an intentional decision by AMC hoping to capture the adult male viewership immediately following the planned end of the NFC game. However, the game ran into overtime, cutting into the show's timeslot in most of America. As a result, the pilot had only about 1.4 million viewers. Coupled with the ongoing writers strike, the first season did not draw as large of a viewership as they expected. However, with subsequent seasons, viewership increased, avoiding the usual trend of downward viewership that most serialized shows had. Ratings further increased by the fourth season as, prior to airing, the previous seasons had been added to Netflix, boosting interest in the show. Breaking Bad is considered the first such show to have a renewed burst of interest due to the show being made available on Netflix. The second half of the final season saw record viewership, with the series finale reaching over 10.3 million viewers.

Season
Timeslot (ET)
Episodes
Premiered
Ended
Average viewers

(in millions)

Date
Premiere viewers

(in millions)
Date
Finale viewers

(in millions)

Season 1
 Sunday 10:00 pm
 7
 January 20, 2008
 1.41
 March 9, 2008
 1.50
 1.23

Season 2
 13
 March 8, 2009
 1.66
 May 31, 2009
 1.50
 1.30

Season 3
 13
 March 21, 2010
 1.95
 June 13, 2010
 1.56
 1.52

Season 4
 13
 July 17, 2011
 2.58
 October 9, 2011
 1.90
 1.87

Season 5A
 8
 July 15, 2012
 2.93
 September 2, 2012
 2.78
 4.32

Season 5B
 Sunday 9:00 pm
 8
 August 11, 2013
 5.92
 September 29, 2013
 10.28

Awards and nominations

Main article: List of awards and nominations received by Breaking Bad

The cast and crew of Breaking Bad at the 68th Annual Peabody Awards

The series received numerous awards and nominations, including 16 Primetime Emmy Awards and 58 nominations, including winning for Outstanding Drama Series in 2013 and 2014. It also won two Peabody Awards, one in 2008 and one in 2013.

For his portrayal of Walter White, Bryan Cranston won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series four times, in 2008, 2009, 2010, and 2014. Cranston also won the TCA Award for Individual Achievement in Drama in 2009 and the Satellite Award for Best Actor – Television Series: Drama in 2008, 2009, and 2010, as well as the Critics' Choice Television Award for Best Actor in a Drama Series and the Saturn Award for Best Actor on Television in 2012.

Aaron Paul won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series in 2010, 2012, and 2014. Paul also won the Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor on Television in 2010 and 2012. Anna Gunn won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series in 2013 and 2014. For his work on season four, Giancarlo Esposito won the Critics' Choice Television Award for Best Supporting Actor in a Drama Series.

In 2010 and 2012, Breaking Bad won the TCA Award for Outstanding Achievement in Drama, as well as the TCA Award for Program of the Year in 2013. In 2009 and 2010, the series won the Satellite Award for Best Television Series – Drama, along with the Saturn Award for Best Syndicated/Cable Television Series in 2010, 2011, and 2012. The series won the Writers Guild of America Award for Television: Dramatic Series in both 2012 and 2013. In 2013, it was named No. 13 in a list of the 101 Best-Written TV Series of All Time by the Writers Guild of America and won, for the first time, the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series. Overall, the show has won 110 industry awards and been nominated for 262.

Retrospective conversations

Writers reunion

\"There was a hive mind with these wonderful writers, where I don't remember who said what, and it doesn't even matter whose idea was whose. But I remember one afternoon, somebody said — and I was kind of into it for a while — \"Wouldn't it be really ironic if Walt is the only one to survive this?\" Because it does seem so obvious that Walt should expire at the end of the final episode — but maybe he's the only one left alive. Maybe he still does have a death sentence, but we go out on him alive, and maybe his whole family's been wiped out. That would have been really f—ing dark.\"

—Vince Gilligan, on an alternate ending

Variety held a Q&A with most of the original writing staff to reflect on the show's run, the final season, the writing process and alternative endings. Along with creator Vince Gilligan, fellow writers and producers Peter Gould, Thomas Schnauz, Gennifer Hutchison, Moira Walley-Beckett, Sam Catlin and George Mastras joined to discuss memories from the show's humble beginnings, character transformations that concluded in the final season as well as surprising developments along the way. For instance, the character of Jesse Pinkman was originally supposed to die halfway through season one in a tragic drug deal gone horribly wrong. The reasoning behind this decision was that Jesse served his purpose \"in a meat-and-potatoes, logistical sense. The character would give Walt his entrée into the business\" before meeting his demise. However, this was eventually done away with as the story progressed beyond Gilligan's early scripts.

The writers also opened up on their collaborative process and how their form of storytelling evolved with the show. According to writer George Mastras,

\"Screen time was precious, and infusing every moment with the emotion , not just forming the pieces of the puzzle to tell the story, which is hard enough. If you're going to take five seconds of screen time, you'd better damn well be sure that there's an emotion there. It may be very, very subtle, but trust the audiences to pick up on that, because audiences do.\"

The development of certain characters posed challenges. Skyler White became unsympathetic to most viewers in earlier seasons as she was often presented as an obstacle to Walt's ultimate agenda. The writers struggled to change the dynamic and realized that \"the only way people were going to like Skyler was if she started going along with what Walt was doing.\" It was a tricky shift to alter on screen because they didn't want to betray her character so they justified the change by using her past job as a bookkeeper to segue into her helping Walt money launder his cash under the guise of a car wash. Breaking the individual episodes was another form of problem solving for the writers. They stressed the importance of not letting the \"master plan\" stop them from staying true to the world they created. There came a point where tracking the characters on a moment-by-moment basis proved to be more useful rather than general direction of the story. Peter Gould said they would always start with the last thought in a character's head. \"Where's Jesse's head at? That was always the prelude to the breakthrough moment, because when you said that, it's usually because we had gotten attached to some big plan or some big set-piece that we thought had to be there, but the characters didn't want to do what we wanted them to do.\"

Rian Johnson's experience on the show

Director Rian Johnson worked on three episodes (\"Fly\", \"Fifty-One\" and \"Ozymandias\") and in an interview with IGN shared his memories from behind the camera. He shed some light on the process including the fact that he sat through \"tone meetings\" with Vince Gilligan. The two of them talked about every dramatic beat in a script, the distinct visual look of the show and how the tonal shift of each scene had to feel natural while serving the main storyline of the particular episode. Johnson also revealed that he learned so much about working with actors because of his directing of Bryan Cranston and Aaron Paul, describing the experience as a \"free masterclass.\"

When asked about the show's lasting legacy, Johnson offered up his thoughts,

\"I think the seriousness and depth with which it took its characters is the thing that really makes it stand apart for me. And that's where the power of it comes from. Obviously, starting with Walter White, there's just very few stories that are told on that scale, that have a character who is that deeply considered at the center of it. And I've heard people describe it as Shakespearean, and I know that word gets tossed around a lot, but I think in this case it really does apply. And that speaks, not so much to the fact that he goes to a dark place, but the fact that his entire journey is so deeply resonant, because it's so deeply considered.\"

Spin-offs and adaptations

Metástasis

On March 13, 2013, after several days of speculation fueled by Univision, Sony confirmed that it would be making a Spanish-language remake of Breaking Bad titled Metástasis starring Diego Trujillo as Walter Blanco (Walter White) and Roberto Urbina as José Miguel Rosas (Jesse Pinkman), alongside Sandra Reyes and Julián Arango in unnamed roles. On October 2, 2013, the cast list was revealed to include Reyes as Cielo Blanco (Skyler White) and Arango as Henry Navarro (Hank Schrader), and that the show would be set in Colombia. The equivalent of Saul Goodman is named Saúl Bueno.

Better Call Saul

Main article: Better Call Saul

Bob Odenkirk's character of Saul Goodman had become one of the show's more popular characters, and Odenkirk, Gilligan, and Peter Gould, who wrote the episode \"Better Call Saul\" in which the character was introduced, started discussions near the end of Breaking Bad of a possible series expanding on the character, eventually settling on the idea of a prequel to show the origins of Saul about six years prior to the events of Breaking Bad. In April 2013, AMC and Sony Pictures Television expressed interest in Gilligan and Gould's spin-off series concept, and they officially ordered Better Call Saul in September 2013. The series focuses on Saul's life six years before he became Walter's lawyer as Jimmy McGill, a more earnest lawyer trying to turn away from his troublesome con-man days. In addition to Odenkirk, Banks and Esposito star and reprise their roles as Mike and Gus, respectively, while several other Breaking Bad cast have guest starred on the show. Newcomers to the starring cast of Better Call Saul include Rhea Seehorn, Patrick Fabian, Michael Mando, Michael McKean, and Tony Dalton.

The show premiered on February 8, 2015, and as of April 2020, finished airing its fifth season, with a sixth and final season scheduled to premiere in 2021 to complete a 63-episode run.

Talking Bad

From August 11, 2013, to September 29, 2013, eight episodes of the live talk show, Talking Bad, aired on AMC, following Breaking Bad. The host, Chris Hardwick, and guests – who included celebrity fans, cast members, and Breaking Bad crew members, discussed episodes that aired immediately preceding the talk show. Talking Bad was inspired by the success of Talking Dead (also hosted by Hardwick), which airs immediately following new episodes of The Walking Dead, and the talk shows share a similar logo and theme music.

Breaking Bad: Criminal Elements

On June 6, 2019, FTX Games released Breaking Bad: Criminal Elements, a strategy-mobile video game for both iOS and Android. The game contains many elements of the original show and focuses mainly on the player building his own drug empire from nothing, similar to how Walt did in the show.

The Broken and the Bad

In June 2020, AMC announced a six-part true crime docuseries inspired by Breaking Bad and Better Call Saul titled The Broken and the Bad. It is hosted by Giancarlo Esposito and will premiere on the AMC app and AMC.com on July 9, 2020.

Fan edit film

In 2017, French editors Lucas Stoll and Gaylor Morestin created a fan edit, simply titled Breaking Bad: The Movie, condensing the entire series into a two-hour feature film and uploaded it onto Vimeo. They had worked on the film for around two years prior to its release. However the film was soon taken down for copyright violation. Critic Alan Sepinwall remarked that the movie \"doesn’t in any way work as a standalone entity.\" In order to achieve feature film length, notable side characters like Tuco Salamanca and the Salamanca Cousins were cut entirely, and the conclusion to the Gustavo Fring story occurred off-screen.

Other

In July and August 2013, amidst the host of games, merchandise, podcasts, and various media AMC had released on the \"Exclusives\" section of the show's official website, over the course of the series, the digital comic book Breaking Bad: All Bad Things was released in August 2013. The comic \"recaps the first four-and-a-half seasons of Walter White's descent from mild-mannered chemistry teacher to drug kingpin\".

In October 2013, New York composer Sung Jin Hong announced his intentions to create an opera inspired by the Breaking Bad episode \"Ozymandias\". The mini-opera titled Breaking Bad – Ozymandias is a combination of Percy Bysshe Shelley's sonnet \"Ozymandias\" as well as the episode.

Prior to the start of production of the fifth season, Jeffrey Katzenberg had approached the series' creators and offered them to produce three additional episodes at US$25 million a piece (compared to the normal US$3.5 million cost of each episode, as to create material for his future streaming platform, Quibi. The episodes would have been broken up into 5 to 10 minute chapters as to fit Quibi's micro-format. The Breaking Bad team turned down this offer, namely as there was not much material they could continue into these episodes.

Sequel feature film

Main article: El Camino: A Breaking Bad Movie

Rumors of a Breaking Bad film, under the working title Greenbrier, had arisen beginning in 2018. The film was formally announced in February 2019, and was later revealed to be named El Camino: A Breaking Bad Movie. The film was released exclusively on Netflix on October 11, 2019, and was broadcast on AMC on February 16, 2020. The film stars Paul reprising his role as Jesse, following the events of the series finale \"Felina\", as the character searches for his freedom.

Real-life influence

Cult following

In 2015, series creator Vince Gilligan publicly requested fans of the series to stop reenacting a scene from \"Caballo sin Nombre\" in which Walter angrily throws a pizza on his roof after his wife refuses to let him inside; this came after complaints from the home's real-life owner. Cranston reprised his role of the character in a commercial for Esurance which aired during Super Bowl XLIX, one week before the premiere of Breaking Bad spin-off Better Call Saul.

Walter White obituary and funeral

A Breaking Bad fan group placed a paid obituary for Walter White in the Albuquerque Journal, October 4, 2013. On October 19, 2013, a mock funeral procession (including a hearse and a replica of White's meth lab RV) and service for the character was held at Albuquerque's Sunset Memorial Park cemetery. A headstone was placed with a photo of Cranston as White. While some residents were unhappy with the makeshift gravesite for closure with the show, tickets for the event raised nearly $17,000 for a local charity called Healthcare for the Homeless.

Others

Several attempts to create a real restaurant concept after Los Pollos Hermanos have occurred, most notably in 2019, Family Style, Inc., a chain of restaurants in California, Nevada, and Illinois, which secured rights from Sony and with Gilligan's blessing to sell chicken dinners through Uber Eats under the name and branding \"Los Pollos Hermanos\" in a three-year deal.

References

^ Poniewozik, James (June 21, 2010). \"Breaking Bad: TV's Best Thriller\". Time. Retrieved November 5, 2013.

^ Nevins, Bill (March 27, 2013). \"Contemporary Western: An Interview with Vince Gilligan\". Local IQ. Archived from the original on April 3, 2013. Retrieved May 31, 2013.

^ \"Breaking Bad Finale: Lost Interviews With Bryan Cranston & Vince Gilligan\". The Daily Beast. September 29, 2013. Retrieved March 6, 2014.

^ Sources that refer to Breaking Bad being considered a black comedy include:
McFarland, Kevin (August 6, 2013). \"The Writers' Strike of 2007–08 Changed Breaking Bad for the Better\". The A.V. Club. Retrieved August 31, 2013.

Snierson, Dan (July 13, 2012). \"'Breaking Bad': Bryan Cranston, Aaron Paul, Vince Gilligan Reveal Season 5 Details\". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved August 31, 2013.

Fienberg, Daniel (July 13, 2012). \"Comic-Con 2012 Live-Blog: AMC's 'Breaking Bad'\". HitFix. Archived from the original on September 27, 2013. Retrieved August 31, 2013.

Bland, Archie (August 8, 2013). \"Breaking Bad: Why Life Won't Be the Same Without This Radical American Television Drama\". The Independent. Retrieved September 1, 2013.

^ \"TRAGEDY IN SLOW MOTION: AMC'S BREAKING BAD\". Filmmaker Magazine. December 22, 2011. Retrieved December 21, 2019.

^ Chisum, Jeffrey (November 22, 2019). \"The Macbeth of the American West: Tragedy, genre and landscape in Breaking Bad\". SAGE Publishing. 14 (4): 415–428. doi:10.1177/1749602019872655.

^ \"Pop Culture's Progress Toward Tragedy\". National Review. May 25, 2019. Retrieved December 21, 2019.

^ Rothman, Lily (September 23, 2013). \"Breaking Bad: What Does That Phrase Actually Mean?\". Time. Retrieved May 11, 2017.

^ a b Sources that refer to Breaking Bad being praised as one of the greatest television shows of all time include:
Moore, Frazier (December 18, 2013). \"2013 brought surprises, good and bad, to viewers\". Associated Press. Archived from the original on December 24, 2013. Retrieved December 24, 2013.

St. John, Allen (September 16, 2013). \"Why 'Breaking Bad' Is The Best Show Ever And Why That Matters\". Forbes. Retrieved December 24, 2013.

Bianculli, David (December 23, 2013). \"Great New DVD Box Sets: Blasts From The Past And 'Breaking Bad'\". NPR. Retrieved December 24, 2013.

\"2013′s 10 Best and Worst TV Shows, From Good 'Breaking Bad' to Bad 'Broke Girls'\". Yahoo TV. December 19, 2013. Retrieved December 24, 2013.

Hickey, Walter (September 29, 2013). \"Breaking Bad Is The Greatest Show Ever Made\". Business Insider. Retrieved December 24, 2013.

Lawson, Richard (July 13, 2012). \"The Case for 'Breaking Bad' as Television's Best Show\". The Wire. Retrieved December 24, 2013.

Ryan, Maureen (July 11, 2012). \"'Breaking Bad': Five Reasons It's One of TV's All-Time Greats\". The Huffington Post. Retrieved July 15, 2013.

^ a b Janela, Mike (September 4, 2013). \"Breaking Bad Cooks Up Record-breaking Formula for Guinness World Records 2014 Edition\". Guinness World Records. Retrieved September 9, 2013.

^ a b c Itzkoff, Dave (August 24, 2019). \"'Breaking Bad' Movie, Starring Aaron Paul, Coming to Netflix in October\". The New York Times. Retrieved August 24, 2019.

^ Snierson, Dan (July 17, 2018). \"Better Call Saul to show scenes set during Breaking Bad\". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved July 17, 2018.

^ a b Klosterman, Chuck (July 12, 2011). \"Bad Decisions\". Grantland. Retrieved July 17, 2011.

^ a b Goodman, Tim (July 13, 2011). \"'Breaking Bad': Dark Side of the Dream\". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved July 17, 2011.

^ a b Bowles, Scott (July 13, 2011). \"'Breaking Bad' Shows Man at His Worst in Season 4\". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 27, 2011. Retrieved July 26, 2011.

^ a b Ginsberg, Merle (July 16, 2011). \"'Breaking Bad' Star Bryan Cranston on Walter White: 'He's Well on His Way to Badass' (Q&A)\". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 27, 2011. Retrieved July 26, 2011.

^ a b c d e f g Dibdin, Emma (January 16, 2018). \"'It Had Never Been Done on Television Before': The Oral History of Breaking Bad\". Esquire. Retrieved July 25, 2019.

^ \"Vince Gilligan Explains Why Breaking Bad Is Called Breaking Bad\". American Film Institute. June 4, 2010. Retrieved November 17, 2010.

^ Rothman, Lily, \"Breaking Bad: What Does That Phrase Actually Mean?\". Time. September 23, 2013. Retrieved March 9, 2014.

^ a b Callaghan, Dylan (2012). Script Tease: Today's Hottest Screenwriters Bare All. Adams Media. pp. 83–4. ISBN 978-1-4405-4176-6.

^ a b c d e f Rose, Lacey; Hunt, Stacey Wilson (July 11, 2012). \"Bleak, Brutal, Brilliant 'Breaking Bad': Inside the Smash Hit That Almost Never Got Made\". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved July 1, 2019.

^ \"Vince Gilligan Talks 'Breaking Bad' Beginnings, 'Weeds'\". The Huffington Post. July 17, 2012. Retrieved October 23, 2012.

^ a b \"AMC Breaking Bad with Bryan Cranston\". IGN. June 20, 2007. Retrieved January 16, 2008.

^ Potts, Kimberly (November 26, 2013). \"'Breaking Bad' Spinoff Scoop From the Man Who Created Saul Goodman\". Yahoo! News. Retrieved August 14, 2018.

^ Brown, Lane (May 12, 2013). \"In Conversation: Vince Gilligan on the End of Breaking Bad\". Vulture. Retrieved June 10, 2013.

^ \"Series 'Breaking Bad' to Begin Production at Albuquerque Studios\". Albuquerque Studios. August 23, 2007. Archived from the original on October 14, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2007.

^ Gilligan, Vince (August 2, 2011). Breaking Bad Insider 403 (Podcast). Breaking Bad Insider Podcast. Event occurs at 7:17–7:50.

^ Dixon, Kelley. \"Breaking Bad Insider Podcast\" (Podcast). iTunes Store. Retrieved December 3, 2013.

^ Littleton, Cynthia (June 13, 2010). \"AMC, Sony Make 'Bad' Budget Work\". Variety. Retrieved November 8, 2015.

^ a b c d Keegan, Rebecca (September 18, 2019). \"'Breaking Bad' Returns: Aaron Paul and Vince Gilligan Take a TV Classic for a Spin in 'El Camino'\". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved September 18, 2019.

^ Hernandez, Brian Anthony (February 24, 2014). \"All 'Breaking Bad' Episodes Are Now on Netflix\". Mashable. Retrieved September 13, 2014.

^ Rhodes, Joe (July 15, 2011). \"Shattering All Vestiges of Innocence\". The New York Times. Retrieved December 20, 2011.

^ Hibberd, James (August 1, 2011). \"'Breaking Bad' Shopped to Other Networks as Fifth (and Final?) Season Renewal Talks Drag On\". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved August 2, 2011.

^ a b Andreeva, Nellie (August 14, 2011). \"AMC & Sony TV Reach Deal for 16-Episode Final Order of 'Breaking Bad'\". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved August 14, 2011.

^ Stoute, Scott (April 11, 2012). \"'Breaking Bad' Season 5 Will Air in 2012 & 2013\". Screen Rant. Retrieved June 24, 2020.

^ a b c d e Segal, David (July 6, 2011). \"The Dark Art of 'Breaking Bad'\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 25, 2011. Retrieved July 25, 2011.

^ Schillaci, Sophie (September 30, 2013). \"Vince Gilligan on 'Breaking Bad's' 'The Searchers' Parallels: 'We Stole From the Best'\". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved March 7, 2020.

^ a b Sepinwall, Alan (March 6, 2009). \"Sepinwall on TV: Bryan Cranston talks 'Breaking Bad' season two\". The Star-Ledger. Archived from the original on July 25, 2011. Retrieved July 25, 2011.

^ Weingus, Leigh (July 16, 2012). \"'Breaking Bad': John Cusack, Matthew Broderick Turned Down Walter White Role\". The Huffington Post. Retrieved October 9, 2013.

^ Rosenblum, Emma (March 13, 2009). \"Bleak House\". New York. Archived from the original on July 25, 2011. Retrieved July 25, 2011.

^ Sepinwall, Alan (March 6, 2009). \"Breaking Bad: Bryan Cranston/Vince Gilligan Q&A\". The Star-Ledger. Retrieved October 21, 2013.

^ Laporte, Nicole (May 14, 2013). \"Bryan Cranston on How to Collaborate the 'Breaking Bad' Way\". Fast Company. Retrieved October 21, 2013.

^ \"Breaking Bad – Aaron Paul Almost Got Killed Off (Paley Interview)\". Paley Center. March 4, 2010. Retrieved August 2, 2011.

^ Couch, Aaron (March 24, 2015). \"How 'X-Files' Gave Birth to 'Breaking Bad'\". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved July 17, 2019.

^ Cyriaque, Lamar (July 14, 2012). \"We Talk to the Cast of Breaking Bad about Science, Swearing, and Saul Goodman\". io9. Retrieved March 5, 2013.

^ Gross, Terry (September 19, 2011). \"'Breaking Bad': Vince Gilligan on Meth and Morals\". NPR. Retrieved March 5, 2013.

^ Creghton, Jennifer (October 17, 2011). \"Scientist Spotlight: Donna Nelson\". The Science and Entertainment Exchange. Retrieved March 5, 2013.

^ Reiher, Andrea (August 12, 2013). \"'Mythbusters' 'Breaking Bad': Methbusters prove and disprove 2 iconic Season 1 moments\". Screener. Retrieved March 6, 2017.

^ Trumbore, Dave (September 26, 2013). \"Fact-Checking the Science of BREAKING BAD: From Fulminated Mercury to FeLiNa \". Collider. Retrieved August 27, 2017.

^ Ohah, Anna (August 13, 2013). \"'MythBusters' proves 'Breaking Bad's' Walt needs some more schooling\". Today. Retrieved January 13, 2020.

^ Dornbrush, Jonathan (August 27, 2015). \"Mythbusters tests Breaking Bad finale trunk machine gun scene\". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved January 13, 2020.

^ Snierson, Dan (February 5, 2019). \"Watch Mythbusters Jr. put Breaking Bad's monster magnet to the test\". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved January 13, 2020.

^ Nagai, Wilhelm Nagajosi; Kanao, Seïzo (February 1929). \"Über die Synthese der isomeren Ephedrine und ihrer Homologen\". Justus Liebig's Annalen der Chemie (in German). 470 (1): 157–182. doi:10.1002/jlac.19294700110. Retrieved December 25, 2014.

^ Wallach, Jason (August 11, 2013). \"A Comprehensive Guide to Cooking Meth on 'Breaking Bad'\". Vice. Retrieved March 3, 2014.

^ a b Harnish, Falk; Salthammer, Tunga (August 2013). \"Die Chemie bei Breaking Bad: Ein Chemiker als Serienprotagonist\"  (PDF). Chemie in Unserer Zeit (in German). 47 (4): 214–221. doi:10.1002/ciuz.201300612.

^ Labuza, Peter (September 5, 2012). \"'Breaking Bad' Director of Photography Michael Slovis Talks About Shaping the Look of the Most Cinematic Show on Television\". Indiewire. Retrieved September 27, 2015.

^ a b c \"Breaking Bad\". Emmys.com. Retrieved September 27, 2015.

^ St. John, Allen (September 26, 2013). \"Working Bad: Cinematographer Michael Slovis On 35mm Film, HDTV, And How 'Breaking Bad' Stuck The Landing\". Forbes. Retrieved July 1, 2019.

^ \"Q&A – Kelley Dixon (Editor)\". AMC. May 2013. Retrieved September 27, 2015.

^ Neuman, Clayton (February 10, 2008). \"Q&A: Bryan Cranston (Walt White) – Part I\". AMC. Archived from the original on February 4, 2012. Retrieved December 20, 2011.

^ Neuman, Clayton (March 24, 2008). \"Q&A: Anna Gunn (Skyler White)\". AMC. Archived from the original on December 24, 2011. Retrieved December 20, 2011.

^ Neuman, Clayton (February 25, 2008). \"Q&A: Aaron Paul (Jesse Pinkman) – Part I\". AMC. Archived from the original on March 4, 2012. Retrieved December 20, 2011.

^ Neuman, Clayton (March 3, 2008). \"Q&A: Dean Norris (Hank Schrader)\". AMC. Archived from the original on March 4, 2012. Retrieved December 20, 2011.

^ Neuman, Clayton (February 28, 2008). \"Q&A: Betsy Brandt (Marie Schrader)\". AMC. Archived from the original on December 27, 2011. Retrieved December 20, 2011.

^ \"RJ Mitte as Walter White Jr\". AMC. Archived from the original on December 18, 2011. Retrieved December 20, 2011.

^ Neuman, Clayton (March 11, 2008). \"Q&A: RJ Mitte (Walter Jr.)\". AMC. Archived from the original on January 9, 2012. Retrieved December 20, 2011.

^ Neuman, Clayton (April 30, 2009). \"Q&A – Bob Odenkirk (Saul Goodman)\". AMC. Archived from the original on December 20, 2011. Retrieved December 20, 2011.

^ Neuman, Clayton (April 27, 2010). \"Q&A – Giancarlo Esposito (Gus Fring)\". AMC. Archived from the original on December 13, 2011. Retrieved December 20, 2011.

^ Neuman, Clayton (November 12, 2009). \"Q&A – Jonathan Banks (Mike \"The Cleaner\")\". AMC. Archived from the original on August 9, 2011. Retrieved December 20, 2011.

^ Porter, Rick (September 9, 2013). \"'Breaking Bad' complete series Blu-ray includes 2-hour documentary, alternate ending\". Zap2it. Archived from the original on November 22, 2013. Retrieved November 18, 2013.

^ Sciretta, Peter (September 23, 2013). \"Geek Deal: 30% Off The 'Breaking Bad: The Complete Series' Collector's Set\". /Film. Retrieved November 18, 2013.

^ Harnick, Chris (November 17, 2013). \"'Breaking Bad' Reveals Wonderful Alternate Ending With 'Malcolm in the Middle,' Jane Kaczmarek\". The Huffington Post. Retrieved November 18, 2013.

^ Teti, John (November 17, 2013). \"Watch this: In Breaking Bad's alternate ending, Bryan Cranston discovers it was all a Malcolm In The Middle dream\". The A.V. Club. Retrieved November 18, 2013.

^ \"AMC Renews Award Winning Drama Series Breaking Bad for Third Season\" (Press release). AMC. April 2, 2009. Retrieved November 17, 2010.

^ Lambert, David (March 28, 2011). \"Breaking Bad – Press Release, Package Art, Extras for 'The Complete 3rd Season' DVDs, Blu-rays\". TVShowsOnDVD.com. Archived from the original on August 15, 2012. Retrieved March 28, 2011.

^ \"AMC Renews Emmy(R) Award-Winning and Critical Hit \"Breaking Bad\" for Fourth Season\" (Press release). AMC. June 14, 2010. Retrieved November 17, 2010.

^ \"AMC Begins Production on 'Breaking Bad' Season Four\" (Press release). AMC. January 7, 2011. Retrieved January 11, 2011.

^ \"Video: AMC Announces \"Breaking Bad\" Season Four Premiere Sunday, July 17 at 10PM ET/PT\" (Press release). AMC. May 31, 2011. Retrieved October 12, 2011.

^ \"'Breaking Bad' Won't Be Back Until July 2011: Plans for Mini-Episodes Online\". Deadline Hollywood. August 4, 2010. Retrieved January 3, 2011.

^ \"Exclusive: Bryan Cranston Talks Breaking Bad Season 3 and 4, Total Recall, Drive, Rock of Ages, Larry Crowne & Lincoln Lawyer\". Collider. June 1, 2011. Retrieved June 14, 2011.

^ Ausiello, Michael (April 17, 2013). \"AMC Announces Breaking Bad's Final Premiere Date, Confirms Launch of 'Spin-Off'\". TVLine. Retrieved April 17, 2013.

^ Shatkin, Elina (August 2, 2013). \"'Breaking Bad': The Ozymandias Trailer That's Driving Everyone Crazy & Making Them Swoon\". Los Angeles Magazine. Retrieved April 2, 2017.

^ Douthat, Ross (July 28, 2011). \"Good and Evil on Cable\". The New York Times. Retrieved January 2, 2012.

^ a b Meslow, Scott (July 23, 2013). \"On 'Breaking Bad,' Family Is a Motivation and a Liability\". The Atlantic. Retrieved August 13, 2013.

^ Simmons, Chris (April 19, 2010). \"'Breaking Bad' Season 3, Episode 5, 'Mas,': TV Recap\". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved August 13, 2013.

^ Bowman, Donna (May 24, 2009). \"Phoenix\". The A.V. Club. Retrieved August 13, 2013.

^ Heritage, Stuart (September 30, 2015). \"Breaking Bad's Lydia: 'Drinking camomile tea with milk is disgusting'\". The Guardian. Retrieved November 11, 2015.

^ Neuman, Clayton (February 17, 2009). \"Watch Five Original Breaking Bad Minisodes\". AMC Blog. Archived from the original on May 31, 2012. Retrieved May 27, 2012.

^ Sepinwall, Alan (May 31, 2009). \"Breaking Bad: Vince Gilligan Season Two Finale Interview\". The Star-Ledger. Retrieved June 8, 2012.

^ a b Gajewski, Josh (May 31, 2009). \"'Breaking Bad': Perfect Season Ends with a Falling Sky\". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved June 8, 2012.

^ Poniewozik, James (June 1, 2009). \"Breaking Bad Watch: Crash\". Time. Retrieved June 8, 2012.

^ Neuman, Clayton (May 31, 2009). \"Creator Vince Gilligan Answers Fan Questions\". AMC. Retrieved May 29, 2012.

^ Stephenson, Hunter (June 4, 2009). \"Breaking Bad's Season Finale \"ABQ\" Gives Ridiculous New Meaning to the Words \"Left Behind.\" Body Bags, Secret Codes, and the Teddy Bear Discussed\". Slashfilm. Retrieved August 8, 2013.

^ Sepinwall, Alan (May 21, 2009). \"Breaking Bad, \"ABQ\": Reviewing the Season Finale\". The Star-Ledger. Retrieved August 8, 2013.

^ Sepinwall, Alan (May 31, 2009). \"Vince Gilligan Post-Mortems Season 2 Finale\". What's Alan Watching. Retrieved January 2, 2012.

^ McNutt, Myles (July 17, 2011). \"Breaking Bad: 'Box Cutter'\". Cultural Learnings. Retrieved January 2, 2012.

^ Bowman, Donna (March 21, 2010). \"No Mas\". The A.V. Club. Retrieved May 22, 2012.

^ Amitin, Seth (October 9, 2011). \"Breaking Bad: \"Face Off\" Review\". IGN. Retrieved January 3, 2011.

^ Coulehan, Erin (September 20, 2013). \"'Breaking Bad' Selling Off Charred Teddy Bear, Walt's Aztek\". Rolling Stone. Retrieved November 19, 2013.

^ Billups, Andrea (September 22, 2013). \"Breaking Bad Auction: Win Walter White's Undies!\". People. Retrieved November 19, 2013.

^ Seitz, Matt Zoller (September 3, 2012). \"Breaking Bad Recap: Walt, Anonymous?\". Vulture. Retrieved November 16, 2012.

^ Sepinwall, Alan (September 6, 2012). \"'Breaking Bad' Creator Vince Gilligan on Poetry Books, Time Jumps and the End for Walter White\". HitFix. Retrieved November 16, 2012.

^ Shields, Michael (August 4, 2012). \"Walter White vs. Walt Whitman\". Across the Margin. Retrieved November 16, 2012.

^ VanDerWerff, Emily (September 3, 2012). \"'Breaking Bad' Recap: Crystal Blue Persuasion\". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved January 7, 2020.

^ a b \"Breaking Bad: Season 1\". Metacritic. Retrieved April 3, 2019.

^ a b \"Breaking Bad: Season 2\". Metacritic. Retrieved April 3, 2019.

^ a b \"Breaking Bad: Season 3\". Metacritic. Retrieved April 3, 2019.

^ a b \"Breaking Bad: Season 4\". Metacritic. Retrieved April 3, 2019.

^ a b \"Breaking Bad: Season 5\". Metacritic. Retrieved April 3, 2019.

^ \"Breaking Bad: Season 1\". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved April 3, 2019.

^ \"Breaking Bad: Season 2\". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved April 3, 2019.

^ \"Breaking Bad: Season 3\". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved April 3, 2019.

^ \"Breaking Bad: Season 4\". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved April 3, 2019.

^ \"Breaking Bad: Season 5\". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved April 3, 2019.

^ \"AFI Awards 2008\". The American Film Institute. Retrieved October 6, 2013.

^ Finke, Nikki (December 12, 2010). \"AFI Top 10 Film/TV Awards Official Selections\". Deadline Hollywood.

^ Truong, Peggy (December 12, 2011). \"AFI Awards 2011: Bridesmaids, The Good Wife among Best in Film and TV\". International Business Times. Retrieved December 14, 2011.

^ Abramovitch, Seth (December 10, 2012). \"AFI Names Best Movies and TV Series of 2012\". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 6, 2013.

^ Hare, Breeanna (December 9, 2013). \"AFI names 10 best movies, TV shows of 2013\". CNN. Retrieved January 10, 2014.

^ Fretts, Bruce; Roush, Matt (December 23, 2013). \"TV Guide Magazine's 60 Best Series of All Time\". TV Guide. Retrieved October 17, 2015.

^ Adalian, Josef (August 12, 2013). \"Breaking Bad Returns to Its Biggest Ratings Ever\". Vulture. Retrieved September 11, 2013.

^ \"Hollywood's 100 Favorite TV Shows\". The Hollywood Reporter. September 16, 2015. Retrieved July 17, 2019.

^ Sheffield, Rob (September 21, 2016). \"100 Greatest TV Shows of All Time\". Rolling Stone. Retrieved September 22, 2016.

^ Stasi, Linda (January 17, 2008). \"TOUR DE PANTS, Breaking Bad is Not Your Typical Drama\". New York Post. Retrieved December 20, 2011.

^ Bianco, Robert (January 17, 2008). \"'Breaking' Is Far from Bad; It's Fantastic\". USA Today. Retrieved December 20, 2011.

^ Tucker, Ken (March 8, 2009). \"Breaking Bad Review\". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved December 20, 2011.

^ Goodman, Tim (March 6, 2009). \"TV review: 'Breaking Bad' Proves Anything But\". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved December 20, 2011.

^ King, Stephen (March 6, 2009). \"Stephen King: I Love 'Breaking Bad'!\". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved December 20, 2011.

^ Poniewosik, James (March 19, 2010). \"TV Weekend: Breaking Bad's White-Hot Slow Burn\". Time. Retrieved December 20, 2011.

^ Gay, Verne (March 19, 2010). \"\"Breaking Bad:\" Still Bad, in a Good Way\". Newsday. Retrieved December 20, 2011.

^ Goodman, Tim (March 19, 2010). \"TV Review: 'Breaking Bad' Premiere\". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved January 2, 2012.

^ Bowman, Donna (June 13, 2010). \"Breaking Bad: Full Measure\". The A.V. Club. Retrieved January 2, 2012.

^ Gilbert, Matthew (July 15, 2011). \"A Gripping Portrait of Change\". Boston Globe. Archived from the original on July 21, 2011. Retrieved December 20, 2011.

^ Owen, Rob (July 17, 2011). \"Tuned In: 'Breaking Bad' Is Back and Better Than Ever\". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Retrieved December 20, 2011.

^ Koo, Carolyn (December 30, 2011). \"Breaking Bad Makes Best of Lists for 2011 of the Boston Globe, New York, and Collider\". AMC. Archived from the original on January 7, 2012. Retrieved January 3, 2012.

^ Poniewozik, James (December 21, 2011). \"What Were the Best TV Lines of 2011?\". Time. Retrieved January 3, 2012.

^ Owen, Rob (December 22, 2011). \"Best TV Show: 'Breaking Bad'\". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Retrieved January 2, 2012.

^ Bowman, Donna (October 9, 2011). \"Breaking Bad: 'Face Off'\". The A.V. Club. Retrieved January 3, 2012.

^ Harley, Nick (September 30, 2013). \"Breaking Bad: Felina, Review\". Den of Geek. Retrieved September 30, 2013.

^ Martin, George R. R. (September 16, 2013). \"Breaking Bad\". Not A Blog. Archived from the original on September 18, 2013. Retrieved October 3, 2013.

^ Amitin, Seth (October 3, 2013). \"Breaking Bad: The Final Season Review\". IGN. Retrieved October 4, 2013.

^ Goldberg, Jonah (August 19, 2013). \"Breaking Bad Breaks Through\". National Review. Retrieved August 20, 2014.

^ Moaba, Alex (October 15, 2013). \"Anthony Hopkins' 'Breaking Bad' Fan Letter To Bryan Cranston Is Awesome\". The Huffington Post. Retrieved November 18, 2013.

^ Hopkins, Anthony (October 17, 2013). \"Anthony Hopkins's letter to Breaking Bad star Bryan Cranston\". The Guardian. Retrieved November 18, 2013.

^ Derschowitz, Jessica (October 15, 2013). \"Anthony Hopkins writes fan letter praising Bryan Cranston, \"Breaking Bad\"\". CBS News. Retrieved November 18, 2013.

^ Couch, Aaron (September 5, 2013). \"'Breaking Bad' Sets Guinness World Record\". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved May 5, 2014.

^ Ewing, Blake (September 20, 2013). \"Breaking Bad Normalizes Meth, Argues Prosecutor\". Time. Retrieved April 23, 2020.

^ \"Breaking Bad blamed for shocking rise in crystal meth usage\". The Telegraph. November 3, 2014. Retrieved April 23, 2020.

^ Braiker, Brian (October 1, 2013). \"Was 'Breaking Bad' Good for the Meth Business?\". Digiday. Retrieved April 23, 2020.

^ a b O'Connell, Michael (September 30, 2013). \"TV Ratings: 'Breaking Bad' Finale Smashes Records With 10.3 Million Viewers\". Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved July 16, 2015.

^ Levin, Gary (March 11, 2008). \"Nielsens: 'Runway' finale rules on cable\". USA Today. Retrieved November 19, 2013.

^ Crupi, Anthony (September 30, 2013). \"Breaking Bad Finale Draws 10.3 Million Viewers\". Adweek. Retrieved June 15, 2015.

^ Seidman, Robert (March 10, 2009). \"iCarly, Burn Notice and WWE RAW top cable charts\". TV by the Numbers. Retrieved June 20, 2011.

^ Levin, Gary (June 5, 2009). \"Nielsens: 'Jon & Kate' plus big ratings\". USA Today. Archived from the original on September 21, 2013. Retrieved July 3, 2015.

^ Hibberd, James (July 16, 2012). \"'Breaking Bad' returns to record premiere ratings\". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved June 16, 2015.

^ Julia (April 7, 2010). \"Breaking Bad Season 3 Ratings\". TV by the Numbers. Retrieved November 10, 2010.

^ Gorman, Bill (June 15, 2010). \"Sunday Cable Ratings: True Blood, Breaking Bad, Army Wives, Drop Dead Diva & Much More\". TV by the Numbers. Retrieved November 8, 2010.

^ \"2010 Year in Review/2011 Year in Preview: AMC\". The Futon Critic. January 24, 2011. Retrieved June 15, 2015.

^ Seidman, Robert (July 19, 2011). \"Sunday Cable Ratings: 'True Blood' Slips, 'Falling Skies' Steady + 'Breaking Bad,' 'Leverage,' 'In Plain Sight,' 'The Glades' & More\". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on July 19, 2011. Retrieved July 19, 2011.

^ Gorman, Bill (October 11, 2011). \"Sunday Cable Ratings: Nothing Keeps Up With Kardashians; Plus 'Housewives NJ' Finale, 'Boardwalk Empire,' 'Breaking Bad,' 'Dexter' & More\". TV by the Numbers. Retrieved October 11, 2011.

^ \"AMC's \"Breaking Bad\" Breaks Records by Growing More Than Any Other Season 4 Drama in Basic Cable History for Adults 18–49\". The Futon Critic. October 10, 2011. Retrieved June 15, 2015.

^ Kondolojy, Amanda (July 17, 2012). \"Sunday Cable Ratings: 'True Blood' Beats 'Breaking Bad' Premiere, + 'Keeping Up With the Kardashians', 'Very Funny News', 'Real Housewives of New Jersey', 'Falling Skies' & More\". TV by the Numbers. Retrieved July 17, 2012.

^ Bibel, Sara (September 5, 2012). \"Sunday Cable Ratings: NASCAR Wins Night, 'Breaking Bad', 'Keeping Up With the Kardashians', 'Leverage', 'Hell on Wheels', 'Married to Jonas', & More\". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on September 8, 2012. Retrieved September 5, 2012.

^ \"Breaking Bad: Season Five Ratings\". TV Series Finale. October 2, 2013. Retrieved June 14, 2015.

^ Bibel, Sara (August 13, 2013). \"Sunday Cable Ratings: 'Breaking Bad' Wins Night, 'True Blood', 'Low Winter Sun', 'Devious Maids', 'Dexter', 'The Newsroom' & More\". TV by the Numbers. Retrieved August 13, 2013.

^ Bibel, Sara (October 1, 2013). \"Sunday Cable Ratings: 'Breaking Bad' Wins Big, 'Talking Bad', 'Homeland', 'Boardwalk Empire','Masters of Sex' & More\". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on October 24, 2013. Retrieved October 1, 2013.

^ \"Breaking Bad (AMC)\". The Peabody Awards. May 2009. Retrieved September 11, 2014.

^ \"Breaking Bad (AMC)\". The Peabody Awards. May 2014. Retrieved September 11, 2014.

^ \"'Mad Men' and Bryan Cranston Three-peat at Emmys While Kyra Sedgwick Finally Wins\". Los Angeles Times. August 29, 2010. Retrieved November 26, 2010.

^ Hayner, Chris E. (February 18, 2013). \"Writers Guild Awards 2013: Full Winners List\". Zap2it. Archived from the original on February 20, 2013. Retrieved February 19, 2013.

^ \"'101 Best Written TV Series of All Time' From WGA/TV Guide: Complete List\". Deadline Hollywood. June 2, 2013. Retrieved July 15, 2013.

^ a b c d Ryan, Maureen (January 19, 2018). \"'Breaking Bad' 10th Anniversary: Writers Reunite to Reflect on What They Learned and That Final Season\". Variety. Retrieved March 18, 2018.

^ a b Prudom, Laura (January 20, 2018). \"Breaking Bad 10th Anniversary: Director Rian Johnson Looks Back at the Show's Legacy\". IGN. Retrieved March 18, 2018.

^ Patten, Dominic (May 10, 2013). \"Univision Announces Adaptations of Breaking Bad & Gossip Girl for Hispanic Market\". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved May 14, 2013.

^ O'Connell, Michael (May 13, 2013). \"Univision and Sony Firm Up Plans for a Breaking Bad Spanish-language Remake\". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved May 14, 2013.

^ Roxborough, Scott (October 2, 2013). \"Meet Walter Blanco: Breaking Bad Gets Spanish-language Version\". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 2, 2013.

^ Bennett, Laura (February 7, 2014). \"The Amazing World of Breaking Bad en Español\". New Statesman. Progressive Media International. Retrieved February 9, 2014.

^ Sepinwall, Alan (August 3, 2018). \"A Candid Conversation With Vince Gilligan on 'Better Call Saul'\". Rolling Stone. Retrieved February 29, 2020.

^ Andreeva, Nellie (April 9, 2013). \"AMC Eyes 'Breaking Bad' Spinoff Toplined by Bob Odenkirk\". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved April 9, 2013.

^ Roots, Kimberly (September 11, 2013). \"Breaking Bad Prequel Spin-Off Better Call Saul Ordered to Series at AMC\". TVLine. Retrieved September 11, 2013.

^ Cornet, Roth (September 11, 2013). \"Breaking Bad Spinoff Series Better Call Saul Confirmed\". IGN. Retrieved September 11, 2013.

^ Kondolojy, Amanda (June 19, 2014). \"'Better Call Saul' Renewed for Second Season by AMC; First Season Pushed Back to 2015\". TV by the Numbers. Retrieved June 19, 2014.

^ Porter, Rick (January 16, 2020). \"'Better Call Saul' Ending With Season 6 on AMC\". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved January 16, 2020.

^ \"AMC Announces Chris Hardwick as Host of 'Talking Bad'\" (Press release). AMC. July 21, 2013. Retrieved July 22, 2013.

^ Agar, Chris (June 6, 2019). \"Breaking Bad: Criminal Elements Mobile Game Lets You Be Heisenberg\". Screen Rant. Retrieved October 29, 2019.

^ Darwish, Meaghan (June 29, 2020). \"Giancarlo Esposito Hosts 'The Broken and the Bad' Docuseries for AMC (VIDEO)\". TV Insider. Retrieved June 30, 2020.

^ Dionne, Zach (March 13, 2017). \"Watch 'Breaking Bad' Edited Down to a Two-Hour Movie\". Fuse. Retrieved June 6, 2020.

^ Desta, Yohana (March 14, 2017). \"How Two Breaking Bad Superfans Turned Their Favorite Show Into a Movie\". Vanity Fair. Retrieved June 6, 2020.

^ Romano, Aja (March 15, 2017). \"Breaking Bad: The Movie shows why Breaking Bad had to be 5 seasons long\". Vox. Retrieved June 6, 2020.

^ Miller, Liz Shannon (March 15, 2017). \"'Breaking Bad' The Movie: How Condensing the Show Robs You of What You Really Want — Walt and Jesse, Together\". IndieWire. Retrieved June 6, 2020.

^ McCluskey, Megan (March 13, 2017). \"Here's the Movie Version of Breaking Bad You Never Knew You Needed\". Time. Retrieved June 6, 2020.

^ a b Sepinwall, Alan (March 14, 2017). \"Your TV Show Doesn't Have To Be A Movie: In Defense Of The Episode (Again)\". Uproxx. Retrieved June 6, 2020.

^ \"Breaking Bad – Exclusives\". AMC. Retrieved May 9, 2016.

^ \"Breaking Bad: All Bad Things Full Recap Comic Now Online\". AMC. August 2013. Retrieved May 9, 2016.

^ Couch, Aaron (August 9, 2013). \"'Breaking Bad' Comic Lets Fans Catch up Before Premiere\". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved May 9, 2016.

^ Atler, Charlotte (October 8, 2013). \"Coming Soon: 'Breaking Bad' The Opera\". Time. Retrieved October 24, 2014.

^ \"Hong '97 Merges Breaking Bad, Ozymandias\". Illinois Wesleyan University. December 16, 2013. Retrieved February 18, 2020.

^ Sharf, Zack (July 3, 2019). \"Jeffrey Katzenberg offered \"Breaking Bad\" team $75 million to make additional episodes\". Salon. Retrieved July 17, 2019.

^ Mitovich, Matt Webb (January 7, 2020). \"Breaking Bad Movie Gets AMC Premiere Date, Following a Full Series Marathon\". TVLine. Retrieved January 7, 2020.

^ Kelley, Seth (March 11, 2015). \"'Breaking Bad' Creator Urges Fans to Stop Throwing Pizzas on Walter White's Roof\". Variety. Retrieved November 8, 2015.

^ Perry, Spencer (February 1, 2015). \"Walter White Returns in Extended Esurance Super Bowl Commercial\". ComingSoon.net. Retrieved November 8, 2015.

^ Gomez, Adrian (October 4, 2013). \"'Breaking Bad' Fan group places paid obituary for Walter White\". Albuquerque Journal. Retrieved January 11, 2014.

^ Hare, Breeanna (October 22, 2013). \"'Breaking Bad': Walter White laid to rest with mock funeral\". CNN. Retrieved January 11, 2014.

^ Grow, Kory (October 21, 2013). \"Walter White Laid to Rest in 'Breaking Bad' Charity Funeral\". Rolling Stone. Retrieved January 11, 2014.

^ Gardner, Chris (October 21, 2019). \"'Breaking Bad' Restaurant Los Pollos Hermanos Comes to Life Via Virtual Restaurant\". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 21, 2019.

External links

Breaking Badat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary

Media from Wikimedia Commons

Quotations from Wikiquote

Travel guide from Wikivoyage

Data from Wikidata

Breaking Bad – official AMC site

Breaking Bad – official Sony Pictures site

Breaking Bad on IMDb

Breaking Bad at Emmys.com

Breaking Bad at TV.com

Breaking Bad at Curlie

v

t

e

Breaking Bad

Episodes

Season 1 
\"Pilot\"

\"Cat's in the Bag...\"

\"...And the Bag's in the River\"

\"Cancer Man\"

\"Gray Matter\"

\"Crazy Handful of Nothin'\"

\"A No-Rough-Stuff-Type Deal\"

Season 2 
\"Seven Thirty-Seven\"

\"Grilled\"

\"Bit by a Dead Bee\"

\"Down\"

\"Breakage\"

\"Peekaboo\"

\"Negro y Azul\"

\"Better Call Saul\"

\"4 Days Out\"

\"Over\"

\"Mandala\"

\"Phoenix\"

\"ABQ\"

Season 3 
\"No Más\"

\"Caballo sin Nombre\"

\"I.F.T.\"

\"Green Light\"

\"Más\"

\"Sunset\"

\"One Minute\"

\"I See You\"

\"Kafkaesque\"

\"Fly\"

\"Abiquiu\"

\"Half Measures\"

\"Full Measure\"

Season 4 
\"Box Cutter\"

\"Thirty-Eight Snub\"

\"Open House\"

\"Bullet Points\"

\"Shotgun\"

\"Cornered\"

\"Problem Dog\"

\"Hermanos\"

\"Bug\"

\"Salud\"

\"Crawl Space\"

\"End Times\"

\"Face Off\"

Season 5

Part 1 
\"Live Free or Die\"

\"Madrigal\"

\"Hazard Pay\"

\"Fifty-One\"

\"Dead Freight\"

\"Buyout\"

\"Say My Name\"

\"Gliding Over All\"

Part 2 
\"Blood Money\"

\"Buried\"

\"Confessions\"

\"Rabid Dog\"

\"To'hajiilee\"

\"Ozymandias\"

\"Granite State\"

\"Felina\"

Film 
El Camino: A Breaking Bad Movie

Characters 
Walter White

Skyler White

Jesse Pinkman

Hank Schrader

Marie Schrader

Walter White Jr.

Saul Goodman

Gus Fring

Mike Ehrmantraut

Related 
Awards and nominations

Better Call Saul

Metástasis

Talking Bad

Breaking Bad: Criminal Elements

Los Pollos Hermanos

Awards for Breaking Bad

v

t

e

BAFTA TV Award for Best International

Entourage (2007)

Heroes (2008)

Mad Men (2009)

Mad Men (2010)

The Killing (2011)

Borgen (2012)

Girls (2013)

Breaking Bad (2014)

True Detective (2015)

Transparent (2016)

The People v. O. J. Simpson: American Crime Story (2017)

The Handmaid's Tale (2018)

Succession (2019)

v

t

e

Critics' Choice Television Award for Best Drama Series

Mad Men, season 4 (2011)

Homeland, season 1 (2012)

Breaking Bad, season 5, part I / Game of Thrones, season 3 (2013)

Breaking Bad, season 5, part II (2014)

The Americans, season 3 (2015)

Mr. Robot, season 1 (2016)

Game of Thrones, season 6 (2016)

The Handmaid's Tale, season 1 (2017)

The Americans, season 6 (2018)

Succession, season 2 (2019)

v

t

e

Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series

1950s 
1951: Pulitzer Prize Playhouse

1952: Studio One

1953: Robert Montgomery Presents (Dramatic Program) / Dragnet (Mystery, Action or Adventure Program)

1954: The United States Steel Hour (Dramatic Program) / Dragnet (Mystery, Action or Adventure Program)

1955: The United States Steel Hour (Dramatic Series) / Dragnet (Mystery or Intrigue Series) / Stories of the Century (Western or Adventure Series)

1956: Producers' Showcase (Dramatic Series) / Disneyland (Action or Adventure Series)

1958: Gunsmoke (Dramatic Series with Continuing Characters) / Playhouse 90 (Dramatic Anthology Series)

1959: Alcoa-Goodyear Theatre (Less than One Hour) / Playhouse 90 (One Hour or Longer) / Maverick (Western Series)

1960s 
1960: Playhouse 90

1961: Hallmark Hall of Fame

1962: The Defenders

1963: The Defenders

1964: The Defenders

1966: The Fugitive

1967: Mission: Impossible

1968: Mission: Impossible

1969: NET Playhouse

1970s 
1970: Marcus Welby, M.D.

1971: The Bold Ones: The Senator

1972: Elizabeth R

1973: The Waltons

1974: Upstairs, Downstairs

1975: Upstairs, Downstairs

1976: Police Story

1977: Upstairs, Downstairs

1978: The Rockford Files

1979: Lou Grant

1980s 
1980: Lou Grant

1981: Hill Street Blues

1982: Hill Street Blues

1983: Hill Street Blues

1984: Hill Street Blues

1985: Cagney & Lacey

1986: Cagney & Lacey

1987: L.A. Law

1988: Thirtysomething

1989: L.A. Law

1990s 
1990: L.A. Law

1991: L.A. Law

1992: Northern Exposure

1993: Picket Fences

1994: Picket Fences

1995: NYPD Blue

1996: ER

1997: Law & Order

1998: The Practice

1999: The Practice

2000s 
2000: The West Wing

2001: The West Wing

2002: The West Wing

2003: The West Wing

2004: The Sopranos

2005: Lost

2006: 24

2007: The Sopranos

2008: Mad Men

2009: Mad Men

2010s 
2010: Mad Men

2011: Mad Men

2012: Homeland

2013: Breaking Bad

2014: Breaking Bad

2015: Game of Thrones

2016: Game of Thrones

2017: The Handmaid's Tale

2018: Game of Thrones

2019: Game of Thrones

v

t

e

Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series – Drama

Marcus Welby, M.D., season 1 (1969)

Medical Center, season 1/season 2 (1970)

Mannix, season 4/season 5 (1971)

Columbo, season 1/season 2 (1972)

The Waltons, season 1/season 2 (1973)

Upstairs, Downstairs, season 3/season 4 (1974)

Kojak, season 2/season 3 (1975)

Rich Man, Poor Man (1976)

Roots (1977)

60 Minutes (1978)

Lou Grant, season 2/season 3 (1979)

Shōgun (1980)

Hill Street Blues, season 1/season 2 (1981)

Hill Street Blues, season 2/season 3 (1982)

Dynasty, season 3/season 4 (1983)

Murder, She Wrote, season 1 (1984)

Murder, She Wrote, season 1/season 2 (1985)

L.A. Law, season 1 (1986)

L.A. Law, season 1/season 2 (1987)

thirtysomething, season 1/season 2 (1988)

China Beach, season 2/season 3 (1989)

Twin Peaks, season 1/season 2 (1990)

Northern Exposure, season 2/season 3 (1991)

Northern Exposure, season 3/season 4 (1992)

NYPD Blue, season 1 (1993)

The X-Files, season 1/season 2 (1994)

Party of Five, season 1/season 2 (1995)

The X-Files, season 3/season 4 (1996)

The X-Files, season 4/season 5 (1997)

The Practice, season 2/season 3 (1998)

The Sopranos, season 1 (1999)

The West Wing, season 1/season 2 (2000)

Six Feet Under, season 1 (2001)

The Shield, season 1 (2002)

24, season 2/season 3 (2003)

Nip/Tuck, season 2 (2004)

Lost, season 1/season 2 (2005)

Grey's Anatomy, season 2/season 3 (2006)

Mad Men, season 1 (2007)

Mad Men, season 2 (2008)

Mad Men, season 3 (2009)

Boardwalk Empire, season 1 (2010)

Homeland, season 1 (2011)

Homeland, season 2 (2012)

Breaking Bad, season 5, part II (2013)

The Affair, season 1 (2014)

Mr. Robot, season 1 (2015)

The Crown, season 1 (2016)

The Handmaid's Tale, season 1 (2017)

The Americans, season 6 (2018)

Succession, season 2 (2019)

v

t

e

Producers Guild of America Award for Best Episodic Drama

Northern Exposure, season 1 (1991)

I’ll Fly Away, season 1 (1992)

NYPD Blue, season 1 (1993)

ER, season 1 (1994)

Frasier, season 2 (1995)

Law & Order, season 6 (1996)

The Practice, season 2 (1998)

The Sopranos, season 1 (1999)

The West Wing, season 1 (2000)

The West Wing, season 2 (2001)

24, season 1 (2002)

Six Feet Under, season 2 (2003)

The Sopranos, season 5 (2004)

Lost, season 1 (2005)

Grey’s Anatomy, season 2 (2006)

The Sopranos, season 6, part II (2007)

Mad Men, season 1 (2008)

Mad Men, season 2 (2009)

Mad Men, season 3 (2010)

Boardwalk Empire, season 1 (2011)

Homeland, season 1 (2012)

Breaking Bad, season 5, part I (2013)

Breaking Bad, season 5, part II (2014)

Game of Thrones, season 5 (2015)

Stranger Things, season 1 (2016)

The Handmaid's Tale, season 1 (2017)

The Americans, season 6 (2018)

Succession, season 2 (2019)

v

t

e

Satellite Award for Best Television Series – Drama

The X-Files (1996)

NYPD Blue (1997)

Oz (1998)

The West Wing (1999)

The West Wing (2000)

24 (2001)

CSI: Crime Scene Investigation (2002)

The Shield (2003)

Nip/Tuck (2004)

House (2005)

House (2006)

Dexter (2007)

Dexter (2008)

Breaking Bad (2009)

Breaking Bad (2010)

Justified (2011)

Homeland (2012)

Breaking Bad (2013)

The Knick (2014)

Better Call Saul (2015)

The Crown (2016)

Vikings (2017)

Homecoming (2018)

Succession (2019)

v

t

e

Saturn Award for Best Syndicated/Cable Television Series

1990s 
The Outer Limits (1996)

The Outer Limits (1997)

Babylon 5 (1998)

Stargate SG-1 (1999)

2000s 
Farscape (2000)

Farscape (2001)

Farscape (2002)

Stargate SG-1 (2003)

Stargate SG-1 (2004)

Battlestar Galactica (2005)

Battlestar Galactica (2006)

Dexter (2007)

Battlestar Galactica (2008)

Breaking Bad (2009)

2010s 
Breaking Bad (2010)

Breaking Bad (2011)

The Walking Dead (2012)

The Walking Dead (2013)

The Walking Dead (2014)

v

t

e

Saturn Award for Best Television Presentation

1990s 
Alien Nation: Dark Horizon (1994)

Alien Nation: Millennium (1995)

Doctor Who (1996)

The Shining (1997)

Storm of the Century (1999)

2000s 
Fail Safe (2000)

Jack and the Beanstalk: The Real Story (2001)

Taken (2002)

Battlestar Galactica (2003)

Farscape: The Peacekeeper Wars (2004)

Masters of Horror/The Triangle (2005)

The Librarian: Return to King Solomon's Mines (2006)

Family Guy: \"Blue Harvest\" (2007)

The Librarian: Curse of the Judas Chalice (2008)

Torchwood: Children of Earth (2009)

2010s 
The Walking Dead (2010)

The Walking Dead (2011)

Breaking Bad (2012)

Breaking Bad (2013)

Game of Thrones (2014)

Doctor Who: \"The Husbands of River Song\" (2015)

11.22.63 (2016)

Twin Peaks: The Return (2017)

v

t

e

Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series

2010: Boardwalk Empire, season 1 
Antonacci

Buscemi

Coleman

Graham

de la Huerta

Laciura

Macdonald

Mol

Palladino

Piazza

Pitt

Shannon

Sparks

Stuhlbarg

Weiner

Whigham

2011: Boardwalk Empire, season 2 
Buscemi

Chianese

Clohessy

Coleman

Cox

J. Gallina

L. Gallina

Graham

Huston

Laciura

Lind

Macdonald

D. McTigue

R. McTigue

Mol

B. Noon

C. Noon

O'Rourke

Palladino

Pennewill

Piazza

Pitt

Shannon

Sparks

Stuhlbarg

Van Wagner

Whigham

Williams

Yusef

2012: Downton Abbey, series 2 
Bonneville

Boyle

Carmichael

Carter

Coyle

Dockery

Brown Findlay

Finneran

Froggatt

Glen

Howes

James-Collier

Leech

Logan

McGovern

McShera

Nicol

Nuttall

Robb

Smith

Stevens

Wilton

2013: Breaking Bad, season 5, part II 
Bowen

Brandt

Cranston

Crawford

Fletcher

Fraser

Gunn

Metzler

Mitte

Norris

Odenkirk

Paul

Plemons

Quezada

Rankin

Sane

2014: Downton Abbey, series 4 
Bonneville

Carmichael

Carter

Coyle

Dockery

Doyle

Froggatt

James

James-Collier

Leech

Logan

McGovern

McShera

Milne

Nicol

Robb

Smith

Speleers

Theobold

Wilton

2015: Downton Abbey, series 5 
Bonneville

Carmichael

Carter

Cassidy

Coyle

Dockery

Doyle

Froggatt

James

James-Collier

Leech

Logan

McGovern

McShera

Nicol

Ovenden

Smith

Wilton

2016: Stranger Things, season 1 
M. B. Brown

Buono

Chrest

Dyer

Harbour

Heaton

Keery

Matarazzo

McLaughlin

Modine

Morgan

Reynolds

Ryder

Schnapp

Steger

Wolfhard

2017: This Is Us, season 1/season 2 
Baker

Breckenridge

S. K. Brown

Chavis

Hartley

Herman

Jones

Metz

Moore

Sullivan

Ventimiglia

Watson

Zeile

2018: This Is Us, season 2/season 3 
Baker

Breckenridge

S. K. Brown

Fitch

Hancsicsak

Hartley

Herman

Huertas

Liburd

Metz

Moore

Ross

Sullivan

Ventimiglia

Watson

Zeile

2019: The Crown, season 3 
Bailey

Bonham Carter

Colman

Dance

Daniels

Doherty

Edwards

Menzies

O'Connor

Phillips

Rintoul

Watkins

Complete list

(1994–1999)

(2000–2009)

(2010–2019)

v

t

e

TCA Award for Outstanding Achievement in Drama

The Jewel in the Crown (1985)

Death of a Salesman (1986)

L.A. Law, season 1 (1987)

St. Elsewhere, season 6 (1988)

Lonesome Dove (1989)

Twin Peaks, season 1 (1990)

thirtysomething, season 4 (1991)

I’ll Fly Away, season 1 (1992)

I’ll Fly Away, season 2 (1993)

NYPD Blue, season 1 (1994)

My So-Called Life, season 1 (1995)

Homicide: Life on the Street, season 4 (1996)

Homicide: Life on the Street, season 5 (1997)

Homicide: Life on the Street, season 6 (1998)

The Sopranos, season 1 (1999)

The West Wing, season 1 (2000)

The Sopranos, season 3 / The West Wing, season 2 (2001)

Six Feet Under, season 1/season 2 (2002)

Boomtown, season 1 (2003)

The Sopranos, season 5 (2004)

Lost, season 1 (2005)

Lost, season 2 (2006)

The Sopranos, season 6, part II (2007)

Mad Men, season 1 (2008)

Mad Men, season 2 (2009)

Breaking Bad, season 3 / Lost, season 6 (2010)

Mad Men, season 4 (2011)

Breaking Bad, season 4 (2012)

Game of Thrones, season 3 (2013)

The Good Wife, season 5 (2014)

The Americans, season 3 (2015)

The Americans, season 4 (2016)

The Handmaid's Tale, season 1 (2017)

The Americans, season 6 (2018)

Better Call Saul, season 4 (2019)

v

t

e

TCA Award for Program of the Year

The Jewel in the Crown (1985)

Death of a Salesman / The Vanishing Family: Crisis in Black America (1986)

Eyes on the Prize (1987)

Dear America: Letters Home from Vietnam (1988)

Lonesome Dove (1989)

Twin Peaks (1990)

The Civil War (1991)

Northern Exposure (1992)

Barbarians at the Gate (1993)

Late Show with David Letterman (1994)

ER (1995)

Homicide: Life on the Street (1996)

EZ Streets (1997)

From the Earth to the Moon (1998)

The Sopranos (1999)

The West Wing (2000)

The Sopranos (2001)

24 (2002)

American Idol (2003)

Angels in America (2004)

Desperate Housewives (2005)

Grey’s Anatomy (2006)

Heroes (2007)

Mad Men (2008)

Battlestar Galactica (2009)

Glee (2010)

Friday Night Lights (2011)

Game of Thrones (2012)

Breaking Bad (2013)

Breaking Bad (2014)

Empire (2015)

The People v. O. J. Simpson: American Crime Story (2016)

The Handmaid's Tale (2017)

The Americans (2018)

Fleabag (2019)

v

t

e

Writers Guild of America Award for Television: Dramatic Series

Lost, season 1 (2005)

The Sopranos, season 6, part I (2006)

The Wire, season 4 (2007)

Mad Men, season 2 (2008)

Mad Men, season 3 (2009)

Mad Men, season 4 (2010)

Breaking Bad, season 4 (2011)

Breaking Bad, season 5, part I (2012)

Breaking Bad, season 5, part II (2013)

True Detective, season 1 (2014)

Mad Men, season 7, part II (2015)

The Americans, season 4 (2016)

The Handmaid's Tale, season 1 (2017)

The Americans, season 6 (2018)

Succession, season 2 (2019)

v

t

e

Writers Guild of America Award for Television: Episodic Drama

1960s

1961: Naked City - \"The Fault in Our Stars\"

1962: Naked City - \"Today the Man Who Kills The Ants is Coming\"

1963: Route 66 - \"Man Out of Time\"

1964: East Side/West Side - \"Who Do You Kill?\"

1965: Mr. Novak - \"With a Hammer in His Hand, Lord, Lord!\"

1966: The Trials of O'Brien - \"No Justice for the Judge\"

1967: Star Trek - \"The City on the Edge of Forever\"

1968: Judd, for the Defense - \"To Kill a Madman\"

1969: Judd, for the Defense - \"An Elephant in a Cigar Box\"

1970s

David W. Rintels for \"A Continual Roar of Musketry\" (1970)

Herb Bermann & Thomas Y. Drake & Jerrold Freedman & Bo May for \"Par for the Course\" (1971)

Herman Miller for \"King of the Mountain\" (1972)

Harlan Ellison for \"Phoenix Without Ashes\" (1973)

Jim Byrnes for \"Thirty a Month and Found\" (1974)

Stephen Kandel & Arthur Ross for \"Prior Consent\" (1975)

Loring Mandel for \"Crossing Fox River\" (1976)

Mark Rodgers for \"Pressure Point\" (1977)

Seth Freeman for \"Prisoner\" (1978)

Leon Tokatyan for \"Vet\" (1979)

1980s

Stephen J. Cannell for \"Tenspeed and Brown Shoe\" (1980)

Steven Bochco & Michael Kozoll for \"Hill Street Station\" (1981)

Michael Wagner for \"The World According to Freedom\" (1982)

David Milch for \"Trial By Fury\" (1983)

Steven Bochco & Mark Frost & Karen Hall & Jeff Lewis & David Milch & Michael Wagner for \"Grace Under Pressure\" (1984)

Georgia Jeffries for \"An Unusual Occurrence\" / Anthony Yerkovich for \"Brother's Keeper\" (1985)

Debra Frank & Carl Sautter for \"The Dream Sequence Always Rings Twice\" / Tom Fontana & John Masius & Bruce Paltrow for \"Remembrance of Things Past\" (1986)

Georgia Jeffries for \"Turn, Turn, Turn\" / Debra Frank & Carl Sautter for \"It's a Wonderful Job\" (1987)

Susan Shilliday for \"Therapy\" / Marshall Herskovitz & Edward Zwick for \"Pilot\" (thirtysomething) (1988)

Karl Schaefer for \"Rolling\" (1989)

1990s

John Sacret Young for \"Souvenirs\" (1990)

Racelle Rosett Schaefer for \"Photo Opportunity\" (1991)

Henry Bromell for \"Amazing Grace\" (1992)

Tom Fontana & Frank Pugliese for \"The Night of the Dead Living\" (1993)

Tom Fontana & David Mills & David Simon for \"Bop Gun\" (1994)

Lance Gentile for \"Love's Labor Lost\" (1995)

Bill Clark & Theresa Rebeck for \"Girl Talk\" (1996)

René Balcer & Richard Sweren for \"Entrapment\" (1997)

Bill Cain for \"Proofs for the Existence Of God\" (1998)

Jason Cahill for \"Meadowlands\" (1999)

2000s

Rick Cleveland and Aaron Sorkin for \"In Excelsis Deo\" (2000)

Tim Van Patten and Terence Winter for \"Pine Barrens\" (2001)

Dawn Prestwich and Nicole Yorkin for \"Pilot\" (The Education of Max Bickford) (2002)

Evan Katz for \"Day 2: 7:00 p.m. – 8:00 p.m.\" (2003)

Debora Cahn for \"The Supremes\" (2004)

Lawrence Kaplow for \"Autopsy\" (2005)

Mark V. Olsen and Will Scheffer for \"Pilot\" (Big Love) (2006)

Terence Winter for \"The Second Coming\" (2007)

Vince Gilligan for \"Pilot\" (Breaking Bad) (2008)

David Foster, Russel Friend, Garrett Lerner, and David Shore for \"Broken\" (2009)

2010s

Erin Levy for \"The Chrysanthemum and the Sword\" (2010)

Vince Gilligan for \"Box Cutter\" / Henry Bromell for \"The Good Soldier\" (2011)

Semi Chellas & Matthew Weiner for \"The Other Woman\" (2012)

Gennifer Hutchison for \"Confessions\" (2013)

Robert King & Michelle King for \"The Last Call\" (2014)

Vince Gilligan & Peter Gould for \"Uno\" (2015)

Vera Herbert for \"The Trip\" (2016)

Gordon Smith for \"Chicanery\" (2017)

Alex Gansa for \"Paean to the People\" (2018)

Will Tracy for \"Tern Haven\" (2019)

Complete list

1960s

1970s

1980s

1990s

2000s

2010s

v

t

e

Better Call Saul

Episodes

Season 1 
\"Uno\"

\"Mijo\"

\"Nacho\"

\"Hero\"

\"Alpine Shepherd Boy\"

\"Five-O\"

\"Bingo\"

\"RICO\"

\"Pimento\"

\"Marco\"

Season 2 
\"Switch\"

\"Cobbler\"

\"Amarillo\"

\"Gloves Off\"

\"Rebecca\"

\"Bali Ha'i\"

\"Inflatable\"

\"Fifi\"

\"Nailed\"

\"Klick\"

Season 3 
\"Mabel\"

\"Witness\"

\"Sunk Costs\"

\"Sabrosito\"

\"Chicanery\"

\"Off Brand\"

\"Expenses\"

\"Slip\"

\"Fall\"

\"Lantern\"

Season 4 
\"Smoke\"

\"Breathe\"

\"Something Beautiful\"

\"Talk\"

\"Quite a Ride\"

\"Piñata\"

\"Something Stupid\"

\"Coushatta\"

\"Wiedersehen\"

\"Winner\"

Season 5 
\"Magic Man\"

\"50% Off\"

\"The Guy for This\"

\"Namaste\"

\"Dedicado a Max\"

\"Wexler v. Goodman\"

\"JMM\"

\"Bagman\"

\"Bad Choice Road\"

\"Something Unforgivable\"

Characters 
Jimmy McGill

Mike Ehrmantraut

Kim Wexler

Chuck McGill

Howard Hamlin

Nacho Varga

Gus Fring

Lalo Salamanca

Related 
Awards and nominations

Breaking Bad

El Camino: A Breaking Bad Movie

Los Pollos Hermanos

v

t

e

AMC original programming

Current 
Better Call Saul (since 2015)

A Discovery of Witches (since 2019)

Dispatches from Elsewhere (since 2020)

Fear the Walking Dead (since 2015)

McMafia (since 2018)

NOS4A2 (since 2019)

Ride with Norman Reedus (since 2016)

Talking Dead (since 2011)

Talking Saul (since 2016)

Talking with Chris Hardwick (since 2017)

The Terror (since 2018)

The Walking Dead (since 2010)

Former

1980s debuts 
The Movie Masters (1989–90)

1990s debuts 
The Lot (1999–2001)

Remember WENN (1996–98)

2000s debuts 
Breaking Bad (2008–13)

Broken Trail (2006)

Celebrity Charades (2005)

DVD TV (2002–08)

Mad Men (2007–15)

Movies That Shook the World (2005)

The Prisoner (2009)

Shootout (2003–08)

2010s debuts 
4th and Loud (2014)

The American West (2016)

Comic Book Men (2012–18)

Dietland (2018)

Feed the Beast (2016)

Freakshow (2013–14)

Game of Arms (2014)

Geeking Out (since 2016)

Halt and Catch Fire (2014–17)

Hell on Wheels (2011–16)

Humans (2015–18)

Into the Badlands (2015–19)

The Killing (2011–13)

The Little Drummer Girl (2018)

Lodge 49 (2018-19)

Low Winter Sun (2013)

The Making of the Mob (2015–16)

The Night Manager (2016)

Owner's Manual (2013)

The Pitch (2012–13)

Preacher (2016–19)

Rubicon (2010)

Small Town Security (2012–14)

The Son (2017–19)

Talking Bad (2013)

TURN: Washington's Spies (2014–17)

Upcoming 
The Walking Dead: World Beyond (2020)

The Spy Who Came In from the Cold (TBA)

Authority control 
BNE: XX5406657

BNF: cb16963580c (data)

GND: 1024517357

LCCN: n2012026114

SUDOC: 180761595

VIAF: 259201274

 WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 259201274

"

