"Deep ravine between cliffs

"Gorge" and "Cañon" redirect here. For other uses, see Canyon (disambiguation), Gorge (disambiguation), and Canon (disambiguation).

The Grand Canyon, Arizona, at the confluence of the Colorado River and Little Colorado River

A canyon (Spanish: cañón; archaic British English spelling: cañon) or gorge is a deep cleft between escarpments or cliffs resulting from weathering and the erosive activity of a river over geologic timescales. Rivers have a natural tendency to cut through underlying surfaces, eventually wearing away rock layers as sediments are removed downstream. A river bed will gradually reach a baseline elevation, which is the same elevation as the body of water into which the river drains. The processes of weathering and erosion will form canyons when the river's headwaters and estuary are at significantly different elevations, particularly through regions where softer rock layers are intermingled with harder layers more resistant to weathering.

A canyon may also refer to a rift between two mountain peaks, such as those in ranges including the Rocky Mountains, the Alps, the Himalayas or the Andes. Usually, a river or stream carves out such splits between mountains. Examples of mountain-type canyons are Provo Canyon in Utah or Yosemite Valley in California's Sierra Nevada. Canyons within mountains, or gorges that have an opening on only one side, are called box canyons. Slot canyons are very narrow canyons that often have smooth walls.

Steep-sided valleys in the seabed of the continental slope are referred to as submarine canyons. Unlike canyons on land, submarine canyons are thought to be formed by turbidity currents and landslides.

Contents

1 Etymology

2 Formation

2.1 Box canyon

3 Largest canyons

4 Cultural significance

5 Notable examples

5.1 Africa

5.1.1 Namibia

5.1.2 South Africa

5.1.3 Tanzania

5.2 Americas

5.2.1 Argentina

5.2.2 Brazil

5.2.3 Canada

5.2.4 Colombia

5.2.5 Mexico

5.2.6 Peru

5.2.7 United States

5.3 Asia

5.3.1 China

5.3.2 India

5.3.3 Taiwan

5.3.4 Others

5.4 Europe

5.4.1 United Kingdom

5.4.2 France

5.4.3 Spain

5.4.4 Ukraine

5.4.5 Others

5.5 Oceania

5.5.1 Australia

5.5.2 New Zealand

6 Canyons on other planetary bodies

7 See also

8 References

9 External links

Etymology

Sumidero Canyon, Mexico

The word canyon is Spanish in origin (cañón, pronounced ), with the same meaning. The word canyon is generally used in North America while the words gorge and ravine (French in origin) are used in Europe and Oceania, though gorge and ravine are also used in some parts of North America. In the United States, place names generally use canyon in the southwest (due to their proximity to Spanish-speaking Mexico) and gorge in the northeast (which is closer to French Canada), with the rest of the country graduating between these two according to geography. In Canada, a gorge is usually narrow while a ravine is more open and often wooded. The military-derived word defile is occasionally used in the United Kingdom.

Formation

Most canyons were formed by a process of long-time erosion from a plateau or table-land level. The cliffs form because harder rock strata that are resistant to erosion and weathering remain exposed on the valley walls.

Canyons are much more common in arid than in wet areas because physical weathering has a more localized effect in arid zones. The wind and water from the river combine to erode and cut away less resistant materials such as shales. The freezing and expansion of water also serve to help form canyons. Water seeps into cracks between the rocks and freezes, pushing the rocks apart and eventually causing large chunks to break off the canyon walls, in a process known as frost wedging. Canyon walls are often formed of resistant sandstones or granite.

Snake River Canyon, Idaho

Sometimes large rivers run through canyons as the result of gradual geological uplift. These are called entrenched rivers, because they are unable to easily alter their course. In the United States, the Colorado River in the Southwest and the Snake River in the Northwest are two examples of tectonic uplift.

Canyons often form in areas of limestone rock. As limestone is soluble to a certain extent, cave systems form in the rock. When a cave system collapses, a canyon is left, as in the Mendip Hills in Somerset and Yorkshire Dales in Yorkshire, England.

Box canyon

For the Colorado canyon, see Box Canyon, Colorado.

A box canyon is a small canyon that is generally shorter and narrower than a river canyon, with steep walls on three sides, allowing access and egress only through the mouth of the canyon. Box canyons were frequently used in the western United States as convenient corrals, with their entrances fenced.

Largest canyons

The definition of "largest canyon" is imprecise, because a canyon can be large by its depth, its length, or the total area of the canyon system. Also, the inaccessibility of the major canyons in the Himalaya contributes to their not being regarded as candidates for the biggest canyon. The definition of "deepest canyon" is similarly imprecise, especially if one includes mountain canyons, as well as canyons cut through relatively flat plateaus (which have a somewhat well-defined rim elevation).

The Yarlung Tsangpo Grand Canyon (or Tsangpo Canyon), along the Yarlung Tsangpo River in Tibet, is regarded by some as the deepest canyon in the world at 5,500 m (18,000 ft). It is slightly longer than the Grand Canyon in the United States. Others consider the Kali Gandaki Gorge in midwest Nepal to be the deepest canyon, with a 6400 m (21,000 ft) difference between the level of the river and the peaks surrounding it.

Vying for the deepest canyon in the Americas is the Cotahuasi Canyon and Colca Canyon, in southern Peru. Both have been measured at over 3500 m (12,000 ft) deep.

The Grand Canyon of northern Arizona in the United States, with an average depth of 1,600 m (one mile) and a volume of 4.17 trillion cubic metres, is one of the world's largest canyons. It was among the 28 finalists of the New7Wonders of Nature worldwide poll. (Some referred to it as one of the 7 natural wonders of the world.)

The largest canyon in Africa is the Fish River Canyon in Namibia.

In August 2013, the discovery of Greenland's Grand Canyon was reported, based on the analysis of data from Operation IceBridge. It is located under an ice sheet. At 750 kilometres (466 mi) long, it is believed to be the longest canyon in the world.

The Capertee Valley in Australia is commonly reported as being the second largest (in terms of width) canyon in the world.

Panoramic view of the Capertee Valley in Australia, the second largest (in terms of width) of any canyon in the world

Cultural significance

Some canyons have notable cultural significance. Evidence of early humanoids has been discovered in Africa's Olduvai Gorge. In the southwestern United States, canyons are important archeologically because of the many cliff-dwellings built in such areas, largely by the ancient Pueblo people who were their first inhabitants.

Notable examples

The following list contains only the most notable canyons of the world, arranged by continent and then country.

For a more complete list, see List of canyons.

Africa

Fish River Canyon, Namibia

Namibia

Fish River Canyon

South Africa

Blyde River Canyon, Mpumalanga

Oribi Gorge, Kwa-Zulu Natal

Tanzania

Olduvai Gorge

Americas

Argentina

Atuel Canyon, Mendoza Province

Brazil

Itaimbezinho Canyon, Brazil

Itaimbezinho Canyon, Rio Grande do Sul

Canada

Grand Canyon of the Stikine, British Columbia

Horseshoe Canyon, Alberta

Niagara Gorge, Ontario

Ouimet Canyon, Ontario

Colombia

Chicamocha Canyon, Santander Department

Mexico

Barranca de Oblatos, Jalisco

Copper Canyon, Chihuahua

Sumidero Canyon, Chiapas

Peru

Cañón del Pato, Ancash Region

Colca Canyon, Arequipa Region

Cotahuasi Canyon, Arequipa Region

United States

Green River overlook, Canyonlands National Park, Utah

Antelope Canyon, Arizona

Black Canyon of the Gunnison, Colorado

Canyon de Chelly, Arizona

Canyonlands National Park, canyons of the Colorado River and its main tributary the Green River, Utah

Columbia River Gorge, Oregon and Washington

Crooked River Gorge, Oregon

Glen Canyon, Utah and Arizona

Glenwood Canyon, Colorado

Grand Canyon, Arizona

Grand Canyon of the Yellowstone, Wyoming

Hells Canyon, Idaho, Oregon, and Washington

Leslie Gulch, Oregon

Oneonta Gorge, Oregon

Palo Duro Canyon, Texas

Rio Grande Gorge, New Mexico

Snake River Canyon, Idaho

Tallulah Gorge, Georgia

Waimea Canyon, Hawaii

Zion Canyon, Utah

Asia

One of the Three Gorges of the Yangtze river, China

The gorge of the Kabul River in Afghanistan

China

Three Gorges, Chongqing

Tiger Leaping Gorge, Yunnan

Yarlung Zangbo Grand Canyon, Tibet Autonomous Region

India

Gandikota, Kadapa District, Andhra Pradesh

Raneh Falls, Chatarpur district, Madhya Pradesh

Garadia Mahadev, Kota district, Rajasthan

Idukki, Western Ghats, Kerala

Taiwan

Taroko Gorge, Hualien County

Others

Afghanistan—Tang-e Gharu

Kazakhstan—Charyn Canyon

Nepal—Kali Gandaki Gorge

Pakistan—Indus River Gorge through the Himalaya

Turkey—Ihlara Valley in Aksaray Province

Cheddar Gorge, England

Le cirque de la Madeleine, Gorges de l'Ardèche, France

Europe

United Kingdom

Avon Gorge, Bristol

Cheddar Gorge, Somerset

France

Ardèche Gorges, Rhône-Alpes

Daluis Gorge, Provence

Gorges du Tarn

Verdon Gorge, Alpes-de-Haute-Provence

Spain

Tagus River Gorge, Guadalajara Province

Gallo River Gorge, Guadalajara Province

Guadalope River Gorge, Teruel Province

Lobos River Gorge, Soria Province

Ukraine

Buky Canyon, Ukraine

Aktove canyon

Buky Canyon

Dniester Canyon

Others

Albania—Osum Canyon

Bosnia and Herzegovina—Rakitnica, Drina, Neretva, Vrbas

Bulgaria—Trigrad Gorge

Germany—Partnach Gorge

Greece—Vikos Gorge, Samaria Gorge

Greenland—Greenland's Grand Canyon

Iceland—Fjaðrárgljúfur Canyon

Kosovo—Rugova Canyon

North Macedonia—Matka Canyon

Montenegro/Bosnia and Herzegovina—Tara River Canyon

Montenegro—Morača, Piva

Norway—Sautso Canyon

Poland/Slovakia—Dunajec River Gorge

Slovenia—Vintgar Gorge

Switzerland—Aare Gorge

Joffre Gorge, Karijini National Park, Australia

Oceania

Australia

Joffre Gorge, Karijini National Park, Western Australia

Katherine Gorge, Northern Territory

Kings Canyon, Northern Territory

Murchison River Gorge, Western Australia

New Zealand

Manawatu Gorge, North Island

Skippers Canyon, South Island

Canyons on other planetary bodies

Ithaca Chasma on Saturn's moon Tethys

Valles Marineris on Mars, the largest known canyon in the solar system

Vid Flumina on Saturn's largest moon Titan is the only known liquid-floored canyon in the solar system besides Earth

Venus has many craters and canyons on its surface. The troughs on the planet are part of a system of canyons that is more than 6 400 km long.

See also

 Environment portal

Antecedent drainage stream

Canyoning – Traveling in canyons using a variety of techniques

Chine

Draw (terrain) – Terrain feature formed by two parallel ridges or spurs with low ground in between

Geomorphology – The scientific study of landforms and the processes that shape them

Gully – Landform created by running water eroding sharply into soil

Steephead valley

Valley – Low area between hills, often with a river running through it

References

^ "canon". archaic spelling of canyon

^ Society, National Geographic (20 May 2011). "canyon". National Geographic Society.

^ Ward Cameron. "Understanding Canyon Formation".

^ Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Canyon" . Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

^ 
"The Geology of the Grand Canyon". Retrieved 2015-10-01.

^ "box canyon". Encarta World English Dictionary. 2009. Archived from the original on 2009-12-17. Retrieved 2009-08-04.

^ "China Virtual Museums: Canyon". Kepu.net.

^ "Park Statistics". National Park Service. USA.

^ Truong, Alice (1 July 2011). "Everything About the Grand Canyon". Discovery Communications. Retrieved 5 February 2012.

^ Cohen, Callan; Spottiswoode, Claire & Rossouw, Jonathan (2006). Southern African Birdfinder. p. 210. ISBN 978-1-86872-725-4.

^ "Grand Canyon of Greenland Discovered under Ice". news.discovery.com. 2017-05-10.

^ Fitzsimons, David (14 December 2015). "Capertee Valley: Australia's own Grand Canyon". Daily Telegraph. Retrieved March 28, 2016.

^ Kruszelnicki, Dr. Karl S. (22 May 2012). "Grand Canyon is not so grand › Dr Karl's Great Moments In Science". ABC Science. Retrieved March 28, 2016.

^ Valerio Poggiali, Marco Mastrogiuseppe, Alexander G. Hayes, Roberto Seu, Samuel P. D. Birch, Ralph Lorenz, Cyril Grima, Jason D. Hofgartner, "Liquid-filled Canyons on Titan", 9 August 2016, http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2016GL069679/abstract

External links

 Look up canyon in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

 Media related to Canyons at Wikimedia Commons

v

t

e

River morphology

Large-scale features 
Drainage basin

Drainage system (geomorphology)

Estuary

Strahler number (stream order)

River valley

River delta

River sinuosity

Alluvial rivers 
Anabranch

Avulsion (river)

Bar (river morphology)

Braided river

Channel pattern

Cut bank

Floodplain

Meander

Meander cutoff

Mouth bar

Oxbow lake

Point bar

Riffle

Rapids

Riparian zone

River bifurcation

River channel migration

River mouth

Slip-off slope

Stream pool

Thalweg

Bedrock river 
Canyon

Knickpoint

Plunge pool

Bedforms 
Ait

Antidune

Dune

Current ripple

Regional processes 
Aggradation

Base level

Degradation (geology)

Erosion and tectonics

River rejuvenation

Mechanics 
Deposition (geology)

Water erosion

Exner equation

Hack's law

Helicoidal flow

Playfair's law

Sediment transport

List of rivers that have reversed direction

Category

Portal

Authority control 
GND: 4147252-4

LCCN: sh85019838

NARA: 10665095
