"For the Conservative life peer, see Carlyn Chisholm, Baroness Chisholm of Owlpen.

19th century English humanitarian who provided support for immigrant females in Australia

Caroline Chisholm

Caroline Chisholm, after a daguerreotype by Antoine Claudet (1853)

Born Caroline Jones

(1808-05-30)30 May 1808

Northampton, England

Died 25 March 1877(1877-03-25) (aged 68)

Highgate, London, England

Occupation Humanitarian work

Known for Humanitarian work, immigration reform

Home town Northampton, England

Spouse(s) Archibald Chisholm

Children 8 children (including Caroline Agnes Gray)

Parent(s) Caroline Jones, William Jones

Caroline Chisholm (30 May 1808 – 25 March 1877) was a 19th-century English humanitarian known mostly for her support of immigrant female and family welfare in Australia. She is commemorated on 16 May in the calendar of saints of the Church of England. There have been proposals for the Catholic Church also to recognise her as a saint; she had converted to Catholicism around the time of her marriage and reared her children as Catholic.

Contents

1 Early life

2 Madras, India

3 Sydney, New South Wales

4 Migration reforms and the Family Colonisation Loan Society

5 Return to Australia and later life

6 Legacy

7 See also

8 References

9 Further reading

Early life

She was born in 1808 as Caroline Jones in Northampton, England, the last child of twelve born to her father, and the last of seven born to her mother, his fourth wife. Her family lived at 11 Mayorhold. Her father, William Jones, had married four times. His first three wives had died in childbirth and from illness. Caroline was a daughter of William's last wife. William Jones, who was born in Wootton, Northamptonshire, was a pig dealer, who fattened young pigs for sale. He died in 1814, when Caroline was six. He left his wife £500 and bequeathed several properties to his twelve surviving children.

On 27 December 1830, Caroline, then 22, married Archibald Chisholm, a Roman Catholic ten years her senior. He was an officer serving with the East India Company's Madras Army. Around this time, Caroline converted to his faith, and they reared their children as Catholic. They were married at The Holy Sepulchre, Northampton, a Church of England church. Roman Catholic clergy were still prohibited from performing recognised weddings until the Marriage Act 1836.

Madras, India

Chisholm's husband returned to his regiment in Madras in January 1832. She joined him there 18 months later. Chisholm became aware that young girls growing up with their families in the barracks were picking up the bad behaviour of the soldiers. In 1834 she founded the Female School of Industry for the Daughters of European Soldiers, which provided a practical education for such girls. They were instructed in reading, writing and religion, cooking, housekeeping, and nursing. Soon soldiers asked if their wives could also attend the school.

While living in India, Chisholm gave birth to two sons, Archibald and William. The family followed her husband on his assignments around the Indian subcontinent.

Sydney, New South Wales

Caroline Chisholm

In 1838 Captain Chisholm was granted a two-year furlough on the grounds of ill health. Rather than return to England, the family decided the climate in Australia would be better for his health. They set sail for Sydney, New South Wales, aboard the Emerald Isle, arriving there in October 1838. The family settled at nearby Windsor.

On trips to Sydney, Chisholm and her husband became aware of the difficult conditions that faced immigrants arriving in the colony. They were particularly concerned for the young women who were arriving without any money, friends, or family, or jobs to go to. Many turned to prostitution to survive. Chisholm found placement for these young women in shelters, such as her own, and helped find them permanent places to stay. She started an organisation with the help of the governess for an immigrant women’s shelter. In 1840 Captain Chisholm returned to his regiment in India, but he encouraged his wife to continue her philanthropic efforts. She set up the first home in Sydney for young women and organised other homes in several rural centres. The home was soon extended to help immigrant families and young men.

Caroline Chisholm Cottage in East Maitland, New South Wales

In March 1842 Chisholm rented two terraced dwellings in East Maitland. She converted them into a single cottage to be used as a hostel for homeless immigrants who had travelled to the Hunter region in search of work. Now called Caroline Chisholm Cottage, it is the only building in NSW so directly associated with Chisholm. Built in the 1830s, the cottage offers a rare example of early working-class housing in New South Wales.

During the seven years when Chisholm was in Australia, she placed over 11,000 people in homes and jobs. She became a well-known woman and much admired. She was requested to give evidence before two Legislative Council committees. Chisholm carried out her work in New South Wales without accepting money from individuals or individual organisations, as she wanted to act independently. She did not want to be dependent upon any religious or political body. The girls and families whom Chisholm helped came from different backgrounds and held different religious beliefs. She raised money for the homes through private subscription. Her husband was invalided out of the Army and returned to Australia in 1845.

Migration reforms and the Family Colonisation Loan Society

Before Chisholm and her husband returned to England in 1846, they toured New South Wales (NSW), at their own expense, collecting over 600 statements from immigrants who had already settled there. Chisholm believed the only way to encourage emigration from England to Australia was for prospective emigrants to read letters from fellow pioneers already living in the colony. In England the couple published some of these statements in a pamphlet titled Comfort for the Poor – Meat Three Times a Day. The writer Charles Dickens used some of the statements in his new magazine Household Words. Their daughter, Caroline Agnes, was born in 1848 during the couple's time in London.

Chisholm gave evidence before two House of Lords select committees and gained support for some of her initiatives. The Committee supported providing free passage to Australia for the wives and children of former convicts, and for the children that, through necessity, emigrants had left behind in England.

In 1849, with the support of Lord Shaftesbury, Sir Sidney Herbert, and Wyndham Harding FRS, Chisholm founded the Family Colonisation Loan Society from her home in Charlton Crescent in Islington. The Society's aim was to support emigration by lending half the cost of the fare (the emigrant to provide the other half). After living two years in Australia, an emigrant would be expected to repay the loan.

Chisholm also held regular meetings at Charlton Crescent to give practical advice to emigrants. The Society initially found accommodation on board private emigrant ships. Later it chartered its own ships to transport emigrants. Chisholm's insistence that the Society's ships improve their accommodations resulted in the upgrading of the Passenger Acts. In 1851 her husband Archibald Chisholm returned to Australia to act as Honorary Colonial Agent, to help newly arrived emigrants and to collect repayment of loans. By 1854 the Society had assisted more than 3,000 people to emigrate to Australia. Chisholm gave emigration lectures throughout Britain, and also toured France and Italy. She collected their son William from the Propaganda College, where he had been studying to become a Roman Catholic priest. Chisholm had an audience with Pope Pius IX at the Vatican, who gave her a Papal Medal and bust of herself.

Return to Australia and later life

In 1854 Chisholm returned to Australia aboard the Ballarat. She toured the Victorian goldfields and was appalled by the conditions en route. She proposed the construction of shelter sheds about a day's walk apart so that prospectors and their families could travel to the work of the goldfields. The project received support from the government. Chisholm continued to work in Melbourne, travelling to and from the home and store which the Chisholms had purchased in Kyneton. She joined her family there three years later. Archibald served as a magistrate during his time in Kyneton, and the two elder sons helped him run the store.

Due to Chisholm's ill health, the family moved back to Sydney in 1858. Her health improved. At the end of 1859 and beginning of 1860, Chisholm gave four political lectures. She called for land to be allocated so that emigrant families could establish small farms. She believed such action would provide greater stability among the new settlers in the colonies. Chisholm also wrote a novella, Little Joe, that was serialised in the local paper.

Her husband accompanied the younger children back to England in 1865. Archibald Jr. accompanied his mother on her return to England in 1866. Chisholm died in London, England on 25 March 1877, and her husband died in August that year. Five of their eight children survived their parents.

Chisholm's body was taken to her home town, Northampton, where it rested overnight in the Cathedral of Our Lady and St Thomas. She and her husband are buried in the same grave in Billing Road Cemetery.

Legacy

Plaque at 32 Charlton Place, Islington, London

The Chisholm Memorial Church at Breadalbane, New South Wales

Caroline Chisholm Centre in Tuggeranong (ACT)

On 32 Charlton Place, Islington, London, a blue plaque commemorates Chisholm living there; it was erected in 1983 by Greater London Council.

The Chisholm Memorial Church (St Silas' Anglican church) at Breadalbane, New South Wales was founded in 1937 and named for her.

A number of educational facilities in Australia and England have been named after Chisholm.

The Chisholm suburb of Canberra was named in her honor and a federal electoral division.

The Federal Government Department of Human Services headquarters, located in Tuggeranong (ACT), is named after her.

Chisholm has been featured on Australian stamps and banknotes. She was also featured on the $5 note, 1967–91.

The Caroline Chisholm Society is an Australian charitable organisation, established in 1969, that provides support and assistance to pregnant women and parents with young children.

In Charles Dickens's novel Bleak House the character of Mrs Jellyby is said to be an amalgamation of three women of the period, including Chisholm.

Caroline, a musical about her time in Australia by Peter Pinne and Don Battye, premiered in Melbourne in 1971.

See also

Chisholm, Australian Capital Territory

Caroline Chisholm (1939), play by George Landen Dann

Caroline Chisholm School, an academy in south Northampton, England

Caroline Chisholm School – Senior Campus in the Chisholm suburb of Canberra, Australian Capital Territory

Caroline Chisholm College in Glenmore Park, New South Wales

Caroline Chisholm Catholic College, Melbourne

References

^ a b c "TIME-LINE – CAROLINE AND ARCHIBALD CHISHOLM" (PDF). mrschisholm.com. April 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 November 2008. Retrieved 24 August 2009.

^ The Age: Chisholm's supporters push for sainthood 24 October 2007 Retrieved 28 May 2008

^ a b c Iltis, Judith. "Chisholm, Caroline (1808–1877)", Australian Dictionary of Biography, National Centre of Biography, Australian National University, published first in hardcopy 1966

^ Walker, Carole, A Saviour of Living Cargoes – The Life and Work of Caroline Chisholm, (Australia Scholarly Publishing, 2009; republished in Australia in 2011 by Connor Court Publishing; UK edition published by Wolds Publishing, 2010: ISBN 978-0956472403)

^ a b Walker, Carole, See Chapter on "India" and Appendix 5: "Rules and Regulations of the Female School of Industry"

^ "Caroline Chisholm Cottage". New South Wales State Heritage Register. Office of Environment and Heritage. H00500.

^ O.M. Flynn, "Caroline Chisholm, the emigrants' friend," Journal of the Australian Catholic Historical Society 3 (2) (1970), 1-7.

^ Chisholm, Caroline, ed. by John Moran, Radical in Bonnet and Shawl: Four Political Lectures; and Little Joe. (Australia: Preferential Publications, 1994 and 1991)

^ "A-Z of Islington's Plaques". Islington Council. Archived from the original on 22 October 2014. Retrieved 22 October 2014.

^ Chisholm Catholic College. Chisholm.wa.edu.au. Retrieved 22 September 2011.

^ Caroline Chisholm College. Carolinechisholm.nsw.edu.au (23 August 2011). Retrieved 22 September 2011.

^ Caroline Chisholm School. Ccs.northants.sch.uk. Retrieved 22 September 2011.

^ Chisholm College – La Trobe University. Latrobe.edu.au. Retrieved 22 September 2011.

^ Chisholm Institute of TAFE Archived 28 August 2008 at the Wayback Machine. Chisholm.vic.edu.au. Retrieved 22 September 2011.

^ Caroline Chisholm Education Foundation. Carolinechisholm.org.au (3 August 2011). Retrieved 22 September 2011.

^ Place name search Archived 27 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine. actpla.act.gov.au

^ 2007 Election:Profile of the Electoral division of Chisholm. Aec.gov.au (7 October 2010). Retrieved 22 September 2011.

^ Australian Stamp Bulletin No 277, Oct–Dec 2004, p. 21. Retrieved 22 September 2011.

^ Museum of Australian Currency Notes: Australia's First Decimal Currency Notes Archived 22 August 2005 at the Wayback Machine. Rba.gov.au (14 February 1966). Retrieved 22 September 2011.

^ www.australianbanknotes.net - R202

^ "About us". caroline.org.au. Caroline Chisholm Society. Retrieved 11 June 2019.

^ Walker, Carole, A Saviour of Living Cargoes, see pages 104-6

^ "Concerning the lady on the $5 note". The Canberra Times. 45 (12, 766). Australian Capital Territory, Australia. 23 March 1971. p. 17. Retrieved 10 May 2019 – via National Library of Australia.

Further reading

De Vries, Susanna. Strength of spirit: pioneering women of achievement from First Fleet to Federation, Millennium Books, 1995. ISBN 0-7022-1346-2

Lake, M./ McGrath, A. et al. (1994), "Creating a Nation", Viking: Ringwood

Hoban, Mary. Fifty One Pieces of Wedding Cake. A Biography of Caroline Chisholm. Lowden, Kilmore Victoria, 1973

Caroline Chisholm at The Australian Women's Register

Caroline Chisholm at the Australian Dictionary of Biography online edition

Culture Victoria – Caroline Chisholm’s Scrapbook

Mennell, Philip (1892). "Chisholm, Caroline" . The Dictionary of Australasian Biography. London: Hutchinson & Co – via Wikisource.

Boase, George Clement (1887). "Chisholm, Caroline" . In Stephen, Leslie (ed.). Dictionary of National Biography. 10. London: Smith, Elder & Co.

Stevens-Chambers, Brenda, Friend and Foe: Caroline Chisholm and the Women of Kyneton 1840-2004 (Springfield & Hart, 2004)

Kiddle, Margaret, Caroline Chisholm (Melbourne University Press. First published 1950; second edition 1957; abridged edition 1969; reprinted with new introduction by Patricia Grimshaw, 1990)

Stinson, Rodney, See, Judge, Act: Caroline Chisholm’s Lay Apostolate (Sydney: Yorkcross Pty Ltd, 2009)

Stinson, Rodney, Unfeigned Love: Historical Accounts of Caroline Chisholm and her Work (Sydney: Yorkcross Pty Ltd, 2008)

Sutherland, Wendy (1967). Caroline Chisholm. Great Australians. Melbourne: Oxford University Press.

v

t

e

Saints of the Catholic Church

Stages of canonization: Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint

Virgin Mary 
Mother of God (Theotokos)

Immaculate Conception

Perpetual virginity

Assumption

Marian apparition

Titles of Mary

Joseph (husband)

Apostles 
Andrew

Barnabas

Bartholomew

James of Alphaeus

James the Great

John

Jude

Matthew

Matthias

Paul

Peter

Philip

Simon

Thomas

Archangels 
Gabriel

Michael

Raphael

Confessors 
Anatolius

Athanasius the Confessor

Chariton the Confessor

Dominic

Edward the Confessor

Francis of Assisi

Francis Borgia

Louis Bertrand

Maximus the Confessor

Michael of Synnada

Paphnutius the Confessor

Paul I of Constantinople

Peter Claver

Salonius

Seraphim of Sarov

Theophanes the Confessor

Disciples 
Apollos

Mary Magdalene

Priscilla and Aquila

Silvanus

Stephen

Timothy

Titus

Seventy disciples

Doctors 
Gregory the Great

Ambrose

Augustine of Hippo

Jerome

John Chrysostom

Basil of Caesarea

Gregory of Nazianzus

Athanasius of Alexandria

Cyril of Alexandria

Cyril of Jerusalem

John of Damascus

Bede the Venerable

Ephrem the Syrian

Thomas Aquinas

Bonaventure

Anselm of Canterbury

Isidore of Seville

Peter Chrysologus

Leo the Great

Peter Damian

Bernard of Clairvaux

Hilary of Poitiers

Alphonsus Liguori

Francis de Sales

Peter Canisius

John of the Cross

Robert Bellarmine

Albertus Magnus

Anthony of Padua

Lawrence of Brindisi

Teresa of Ávila

Catherine of Siena

Thérèse of Lisieux

John of Ávila

Hildegard of Bingen

Gregory of Narek

Evangelists 
Matthew

Mark

Luke

John

Church

Fathers 
Alexander of Alexandria

Alexander of Jerusalem

Ambrose of Milan

Anatolius

Athanasius of Alexandria

Augustine of Hippo

Caesarius of Arles

Caius

Cappadocian Fathers

Clement of Alexandria

Clement of Rome

Cyprian of Carthage

Cyril of Alexandria

Cyril of Jerusalem

Damasus I

Desert Fathers

Desert Mothers

Dionysius of Alexandria

Dionysius of Corinth

Dionysius

Ephrem the Syrian

Epiphanius of Salamis

Fulgentius of Ruspe

Gregory the Great

Gregory of Nazianzus

Gregory of Nyssa

Hilary of Poitiers

Hippolytus of Rome

Ignatius of Antioch

Irenaeus of Lyons

Isidore of Seville

Jerome of Stridonium

John Chrysostom

John of Damascus

Maximus the Confessor

Melito of Sardis

Quadratus of Athens

Papias of Hierapolis

Peter Chrysologus

Polycarp of Smyrna

Theophilus of Antioch

Victorinus of Pettau

Vincent of Lérins

Zephyrinus

Martyrs 
Canadian Martyrs

Carthusian Martyrs

Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala

Dismas the Good Thief

Forty Martyrs of England and Wales

Four Crowned Martyrs

Gerard of Csanád

Great Martyr

The Holy Innocents

Irish Martyrs

Joan of Arc

John Fisher

Korean Martyrs

Lorenzo Ruiz

Lübeck martyrs

Luigi Versiglia

Martyrology

Martyrs of Albania

Martyrs of China

Martyrs of Japan

Martyrs of Laos

Martyrs of Natal

Martyrs of Otranto

Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War

Maximilian Kolbe

Óscar Romero

Pedro Calungsod

Perpetua and Felicity

Peter Chanel

Pietro Parenzo

Philomena

Saints of the Cristero War

Stephen

Teresa Benedicta of the Cross

Thomas Becket

Thomas More

Three Martyrs of Chimbote

Uganda Martyrs

Vietnamese Martyrs

Valentine of Rome

Victor and Corona

Missionaries 
Augustine of Canterbury

Boniface

Damien of Molokai

Francis Xavier

François de Laval

Gregory the Illuminator

Junípero Serra

Nico of Georgia

Patrick of Ireland

Remigius

Patriarchs 
Adam

Abel

Abraham

Isaac

Jacob

Joseph

Joseph (father of Jesus)

David

Noah

Solomon

Matriarchs

Popes 
Adeodatus I

Adeodatus II

Adrian III

Agapetus I

Agatho

Alexander I

Anacletus

Anastasius I

Anicetus

Anterus

Benedict II

Boniface I

Boniface IV

Caius

Callixtus I

Celestine I

Celestine V

Clement I

Cornelius

Damasus I

Dionysius

Eleuterus

Eugene I

Eusebius

Eutychian

Evaristus

Fabian

Felix I

Felix III

Felix IV

Gelasius I

Gregory I

Gregory II

Gregory III

Gregory VII

Hilarius

Hormisdas

Hyginus

Innocent I

John I

John XXIII

John Paul II

Julius I

Leo I

Leo II

Leo III

Leo IV

Leo IX

Linus

Lucius I

Marcellinus

Marcellus I

Mark

Martin I

Miltiades

Nicholas I

Paschal I

Paul I

Paul VI

Peter

Pius I

Pius V

Pius X

Pontian

Sergius I

Silverius

Simplicius

Siricius

Sixtus I

Sixtus II

Sixtus III

Soter

Stephen I

Stephen IV

Sylvester I

Symmachus

Telesphorus

Urban I

Victor I

Vitalian

Zachary

Zephyrinus

Zosimus

Prophets 
Agabus

Amos

Anna

Baruch ben Neriah

David

Dalua

Elijah

Ezekiel

Habakkuk

Haggai

Hosea

Isaiah

Jeremiah

Job

Joel

John the Baptist

Jonah

Judas Barsabbas

Malachi

Melchizedek

Micah

Moses

Nahum

Obadiah

Samuel

Seven Maccabees and their mother

Simeon

Zechariah (prophet)

Zechariah (NT)

Zephaniah

Virgins 
Agatha of Sicily

Agnes of Rome

Angela of the Cross

Æthelthryth

Bernadette Soubirous

Brigid of Kildare

Catherine Labouré

Catherine of Siena

Cecilia

Clare of Assisi

Eulalia of Mérida

Euphemia

Faustina Kowalska

Genevieve

Kateri Tekakwitha

Lucy of Syracuse

Maria Goretti

Teresa of Calcutta

Narcisa de Jesús

Rose of Lima

See also 
Calendar of saints

Fourteen Holy Helpers

Military saints
Athleta Christi

Miles Christianus

Church Militant

Virtuous pagan

 Catholic Church portal

 Saints portal

Authority control 
ADB: chisholm-caroline-1894

AWR: AWE1145b

BNE: XX5440139

GND: 1015438083

ISNI: 0000 0000 6361 6612

LCCN: n86014400

NLA: 36058300

NLI: 000479506

NTA: 180968122

SNAC: w60g4v5r

Trove: 612352

VIAF: 31009524

 WorldCat Identities: lccn-n86014400
