"The practice of suppressing information

For Wikipedia's policy concerning censorship, see Wikipedia:Wikipedia is not censored

The plaster cast of David at the Victoria and Albert Museum has a detachable plaster fig leaf which is displayed nearby. Legend claims that the fig leaf was created in response to Queen Victoria's shock upon first viewing the statue's nudity, and was hung on the figure prior to royal visits, using two strategically placed hooks.

Information science

General aspects

Information access

Information architecture

Information behavior

Information management

Information retrieval

Information seeking

Information society

Knowledge organization

Ontology

Philosophy of information

Science and technology studies

Taxonomy

Related fields and sub-fields

Bibliometrics

Categorization

Censorship

Classification

Computer data storage

Cultural studies

Data modeling

Informatics

Information technology

Intellectual freedom

Intellectual property

Library and information science

Memory

Preservation

Privacy

Quantum information science

v

t

e

 Part of a series on

Censorship by country

Countries

Algeria

Armenia

Australia

Azerbaijan

Bangladesh

Belarus

Bhutan

Bolivia

Brazil

Canada

China

(Hong Kong/overseas)

Cuba

Czech Republic

Denmark

Ecuador

Eritrea

Finland

France

Germany (Nazi / Democratic Republic / Federal Republic)

Honduras

India

Iran

Iraq

Ireland

Israel

Italy

Jamaica

Japan

Malaysia

Maldives

Mexico

Myanmar

New Zealand

Nigeria

North Korea

Pakistan

Paraguay

Philippines

Poland

Portugal

Romania

Russia

(Soviet Union / Russian Empire)

Samoa

Saudi Arabia

Serbia

Singapore

Somalia

South Korea

Spain

Sri Lanka

Sweden

Taiwan

Thailand

Tunisia

Turkey

Ukraine

United Kingdom

United States

Venezuela

Vietnam

See also

Freedom of speech by country

Internet censorship and surveillance by country

v

t

e

Censorship is the suppression of speech, public communication, or other information, on the basis that such material is considered objectionable, harmful, sensitive, or "inconvenient." Censorship can be conducted by governments, private institutions, and other controlling bodies.

Governments and private organizations may engage in censorship. Other groups or institutions may propose and petition for censorship. When an individual such as an author or other creator engages in censorship of their own works or speech, it is referred to as self-censorship. General censorship occurs in a variety of different media, including speech, books, music, films, and other arts, the press, radio, television, and the Internet for a variety of claimed reasons including national security, to control obscenity, child pornography, and hate speech, to protect children or other vulnerable groups, to promote or restrict political or religious views, and to prevent slander and libel.

Direct censorship may or may not be legal, depending on the type, location, and content. Many countries provide strong protections against censorship by law, but none of these protections are absolute and frequently a claim of necessity to balance conflicting rights is made, in order to determine what could and could not be censored. There are no laws against self-censorship.

Contents

1 History

2 Rationale and criticism

3 Types

3.1 Political

3.2 State secrets and prevention of attention

3.3 Religion

3.4 Educational sources

3.5 Economic Induced Censorship

3.6 Self-censorship

3.7 Copy, picture, and writer approval

3.8 Reverse censorship

4 By media

4.1 Books

4.2 Films

4.3 Music

4.4 Maps

4.5 Art

4.6 Internet

4.6.1 Social media

4.7 Video games

5 Impact of surveillance

6 Implementation

7 By country

7.1 Canada

7.2 Cuba

7.3 China

7.4 Eastern Bloc

7.5 France

7.6 India

7.7 Iran

7.8 Iraq

7.9 Malaysia

7.10 North Korea

7.11 Serbia

7.12 Singapore

7.13 Soviet Union

7.14 Spain

7.15 Turkey

7.16 United Kingdom

7.17 United States

7.18 Uruguay

8 See also

9 References

9.1 Works cited

10 Further reading

History

Chinese troops destroyed the statue Goddess of Democracy in Tiananmen Square in 1989, and continue to censor information about those events. This statue, now known as the Victims of Communism Memorial, was recreated by Thomas Marsh in Washington, DC.

Book burning in Chile following the 1973 coup that installed the Pinochet regime.

In 399 BC, Greek philosopher, Socrates, while defying attempts by the Greek state to censor his philosophical teachings, was accused of collateral charges related to the corruption of Athenian youth and sentenced to death by drinking a poison, hemlock.

The details of Socrates's conviction are recorded by Plato as follows. In 399 BC, Socrates went on trial and was subsequently found guilty of both corrupting the minds of the youth of Athens and of impiety (asebeia, "not believing in the gods of the state"), and as a punishment sentenced to death, caused by the drinking of a mixture containing hemlock.

Socrates' student, Plato, is said to have advocated censorship in his essay on The Republic, which opposed the existence of democracy. In contrast to Plato, Greek playwright Euripides (480–406 BC) defended the true liberty of freeborn men, including the right to speak freely. In 1766, Sweden became the first country to abolish censorship by law.

Rationale and criticism

Censorship has been criticized throughout history for being unfair and hindering progress. In a 1997 essay on Internet censorship, social commentator Michael Landier claims that censorship is counterproductive as it prevents the censored topic from being discussed. Landier expands his argument by claiming that those who impose censorship must consider what they censor to be true, as individuals believing themselves to be correct would welcome the opportunity to disprove those with opposing views.

Censorship is often used to impose moral values on society, as in the censorship of material considered obscene. English novelist E. M. Forster was a staunch opponent of censoring material on the grounds that it was obscene or immoral, raising the issue of moral subjectivity and the constant changing of moral values. When the novel Lady Chatterley's Lover was put on trial in 1960, Forster wrote:

Lady Chatterley's Lover is a literary work of importance...I do not think that it could be held obscene, but am in a difficulty here, for the reason that I have never been able to follow the legal definition of obscenity. The law tells me that obscenity may deprave and corrupt, but as far as I know, it offers no definition of depravity or corruption.

Proponents have sought to justify it using different rationales for various types of information censored:

Moral censorship is the removal of materials that are obscene or otherwise considered morally questionable. Pornography, for example, is often censored under this rationale, especially child pornography, which is illegal and censored in most jurisdictions in the world.

Military censorship is the process of keeping military intelligence and tactics confidential and away from the enemy. This is used to counter espionage.

Political censorship occurs when governments hold back information from their citizens. This is often done to exert control over the populace and prevent free expression that might foment rebellion.

Religious censorship is the means by which any material considered objectionable by a certain religion is removed. This often involves a dominant religion forcing limitations on less prevalent ones. Alternatively, one religion may shun the works of another when they believe the content is not appropriate for their religion.

Corporate censorship is the process by which editors in corporate media outlets intervene to disrupt the publishing of information that portrays their business or business partners in a negative light, or intervene to prevent alternate offers from reaching public exposure.

Types

Political

Main article: Political censorship

See also: Eastern Bloc information dissemination, Censorship in Cuba, Censorship in the People's Republic of China, and Censorship in North Korea

State secrets and prevention of attention

The daily newspaper of Wrocław, Polish People's Republic, March 20–21, 1981, with censor intervention on first and last pages – under the headlines "Co zdarzyło się w Bydgoszczy?" (What happened in Bydgoszcz?) and "Pogotowie strajkowe w całym kraju" (Country-wide strike alert). The censor had removed a section regarding the strike alert; hence the workers in the printing house blanked out an official propaganda section. The right-hand page also includes a hand-written confirmation of that decision by the local Solidarity trade union.

In wartime, explicit censorship is carried out with the intent of preventing the release of information that might be useful to an enemy. Typically it involves keeping times or locations secret, or delaying the release of information (e.g., an operational objective) until it is of no possible use to enemy forces. The moral issues here are often seen as somewhat different, as the proponents of this form of censorship argues that release of tactical information usually presents a greater risk of casualties among one's own forces and could possibly lead to loss of the overall conflict.

During World War I letters written by British soldiers would have to go through censorship. This consisted of officers going through letters with a black marker and crossing out anything which might compromise operational secrecy before the letter was sent. The World War II catchphrase "Loose lips sink ships" was used as a common justification to exercise official wartime censorship and encourage individual restraint when sharing potentially sensitive information.

An example of "sanitization" policies comes from the USSR under Joseph Stalin, where publicly used photographs were often altered to remove people whom Stalin had condemned to execution. Though past photographs may have been remembered or kept, this deliberate and systematic alteration to all of history in the public mind is seen as one of the central themes of Stalinism and totalitarianism.

Censorship is occasionally carried out to aid authorities or to protect an individual, as with some kidnappings when attention and media coverage of the victim can sometimes be seen as unhelpful.

Religion

Main article: Censorship by religion

Censorship by religion is a form of censorship where freedom of expression is controlled or limited using religious authority or on the basis of the teachings of the religion. This form of censorship has a long history and is practiced in many societies and by many religions. Examples include the Galileo affair, Edict of Compiègne, the Index Librorum Prohibitorum (list of prohibited books) and the condemnation of Salman Rushdie's novel The Satanic Verses by Iranian leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. Images of the Islamic figure Muhammad are also regularly censored. In some secular countries, this is sometimes done to prevent hurting religious sentiments.

Educational sources

Historic Russian censorship. Book Notes of my life by N.I. Grech, published in St. Petersburg 1886 by A.S. Suvorin. The censored text was replaced by dots.

The content of school textbooks is often an issue of debate, since their target audience is young people. The term whitewashing is commonly used to refer to revisionism aimed at glossing over difficult or questionable historical events, or a biased presentation thereof. The reporting of military atrocities in history is extremely controversial, as in the case of The Holocaust (or Holocaust denial), Bombing of Dresden, the Nanking Massacre as found with Japanese history textbook controversies, the Armenian Genocide, the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, and the Winter Soldier Investigation of the Vietnam War.

In the context of secondary school education, the way facts and history are presented greatly influences the interpretation of contemporary thought, opinion and socialization. One argument for censoring the type of information disseminated is based on the inappropriate quality of such material for the younger public. The use of the "inappropriate" distinction is in itself controversial, as it changed heavily. A Ballantine Books version of the book Fahrenheit 451 which is the version used by most school classes contained approximately 75 separate edits, omissions, and changes from the original Bradbury manuscript.

In February 2006, a National Geographic cover was censored by the Nashravaran Journalistic Institute. The offending cover was about the subject of love and a picture of an embracing couple was hidden beneath a white sticker.

Economic Induced Censorship

Economic induced censorship, is a type of censorship enacted by economic markets, to favor, and disregard types of information. Economic induced censorship, is also caused, by market forces which privatize and establish commodification of certain information that is not accessible by the general public, primarily because of the cost associated with commodified information such as academic journals, industry reports and pay to use repositories.

The concept was illustrated as a censorship pyramid that was conceptualized by primarily Julian Assange, along with Andy Müller-Maguhn, Jacob Appelbaum and Jérémie Zimmermann, in the Cypherpunks (book).

Self-censorship

Author Ozzie Zehner self-censored the American edition of his environmental book, Green Illusions, fearing food libel laws.

Main article: Self-censorship

Self-censorship is the act of censoring or classifying one's own discourse. This is done out of fear of, or deference to, the sensibilities or preferences (actual or perceived) of others and without overt pressure from any specific party or institution of authority. Self-censorship is often practiced by film producers, film directors, publishers, news anchors, journalists, musicians, and other kinds of authors including individuals who use social media.

According to a Pew Research Center and the Columbia Journalism Review survey, "About one-quarter of the local and national journalists say they have purposely avoided newsworthy stories, while nearly as many acknowledge they have softened the tone of stories to benefit the interests of their news organizations. Fully four-in-ten (41%) admit they have engaged in either or both of these practices."

Threats to media freedom have shown a significant increase in Europe in recent years, according to a study published in April 2017 by the Council of Europe.
This results in a fear of physical or psychological violence, and the ultimate result is self-censorship by journalists.

Copy, picture, and writer approval

Copy approval is the right to read and amend an article, usually an interview, before publication. Many publications refuse to give copy approval but it is increasingly becoming common practice when dealing with publicity anxious celebrities. Picture approval is the right given to an individual to choose which photos will be published and which will not. Robert Redford is well known for insisting upon picture approval. Writer approval is when writers are chosen based on whether they will write flattering articles or not. Hollywood publicist Pat Kingsley is known for banning certain writers who wrote undesirably about one of her clients from interviewing any of her other clients.

Reverse censorship

Flooding the public, often through online social networks, with false or misleading information is sometimes called "reverse censorship." American legal scholar Tim Wu has explained that this type of information control, sometimes by state actors, can "distort or drown out disfavored speech through the creation and dissemination of fake news, the payment of fake commentators, and the deployment of propaganda robots."

By media

 This section needs expansion with: Television and News Media censorship. You can help by adding to it. (May 2020)

Books

Main article: Book censorship

Nazi book burning in Berlin, May 1933.

Book censorship can be enacted at the national or sub-national level, and can carry legal penalties for their infraction. Books may also be challenged at a local, community level. As a result, books can be removed from schools or libraries, although these bans do not extend outside of that area.

Films

Main article: Film censorship

Aside from the usual justifications of pornography and obscenity, some films are censored due to changing racial attitudes or political correctness in order to avoid ethnic stereotyping and/or ethnic offense despite its historical or artistic value. One example is the still withdrawn "Censored Eleven" series of animated cartoons, which may have been innocent then, but are "incorrect" now.

Film censorship is carried out by various countries to differing degrees. For example, only 34 foreign films a year are approved for official distribution in China's strictly controlled film market.

Music

Main article: Censorship of music

Music censorship has been implemented by states, religions, educational systems, families, retailers and lobbying groups – and in most cases they violate international conventions of human rights.

Maps

Main article: Censorship of maps

Censorship of maps is often employed for military purposes. For example, the technique was used in former East Germany, especially for the areas near the border to West Germany in order to make attempts of defection more difficult. Censorship of maps is also applied by Google Maps, where certain areas are grayed out or blacked or areas are purposely left outdated with old imagery.

Art

Art is loved and feared because of its evocative power. Destroying or oppressing art can potentially justify its meaning even more.

British photographer and visual artist Graham Ovenden's photos and paintings were ordered to be destroyed by a London's magistrate court in 2015 for being "indecent" and their copies had been removed from the online Tate gallery.

Artworks using these four colors were banned by Israeli law in the 1980s

A 1980 Israeli law forbade banned artwork composed of the four colours of the Palestinian flag, and Palestinians were arrested for displaying such artwork or even for carrying sliced melons with the same pattern.

Cuban Artist: Tania Bruguera

Moath al-Alwi is a Guantanamo Bay Prisoner who creates model ships as an expression of art. Alwi does so with the few tools he has at his disposal such as floss and shampoo bottles, and he is also allowed to use a small pair of scissors with rounded edges. A few of Alwi's pieces are on display at John Jay College of Criminal Justice in New York. There are also other artworks on display at the College that were created by other inmates. The artwork that is being displayed might be the only way for some of the inmates to communicate with the outside. Recently things have changed though. The military has come up with a new policy that won't allow the artwork at Guantanamo Bay Military Prison to leave the prison. The art work created by Alwi and other prisoners is now government property and can be destroyed by them or disposed in whatever way they choose, making it no longer the artist's property. 

Around 300 artists in Cuba are fighting for their artistic freedom due to new censorship rules Cuba's government has in place for artists. Recently, Tania Bruguera, a musician was detained upon arriving to Havana and released after four days because of these new censorships restrains Cuba has on artists there.

The Degenerate Art Exhibition

An example of extreme state censorship was the Nazis requirements of using art as propaganda. Art was only allowed to be used as a political instrument to control people and failure to act in accordance with the censors was punishable by law, even fatal. The Degenerate Art Exhibition is a historical instance that's goal was to advertise Nazi values and slander others.

Internet

Main article: Internet censorship

Internet censorship and surveillance by country (2018)

Pervasive

Substantial

Selective

Little or no

Not classified / No data

Internet censorship is control or suppression of the publishing or accessing of information on the Internet. It may be carried out by governments or by private organizations either at the behest of government or on their own initiative. Individuals and organizations may engage in self-censorship on their own or due to intimidation and fear.

The issues associated with Internet censorship are similar to those for offline censorship of more traditional media. One difference is that national borders are more permeable online: residents of a country that bans certain information can find it on websites hosted outside the country. Thus censors must work to prevent access to information even though they lack physical or legal control over the websites themselves. This in turn requires the use of technical censorship methods that are unique to the Internet, such as site blocking and content filtering. 

Furthermore, the Domain Name System (DNS) a critical component of the Internet is dominated by centralized and few entities. The most widely used DNS root is administered by the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN). As an administrator they have rights to shut down and seize domain names when they deem necessary to do so and at most times the direction is from governments. This has been the case with Wikileaks shutdowns and name seizure events such as the ones executed by the National Intellectual Property Rights Coordination Center (IPR Center) managed by the Homeland Security Investigations (HSI). This makes it easy for internet censorship by authorities as they have control over what should or should not be on the Internet. Some activists and researchers have started opting for alternative DNS roots, though the Internet Architecture Board (IAB) does not support these DNS root providers. 

Unless the censor has total control over all Internet-connected computers, such as in North Korea or Cuba, total censorship of information is very difficult or impossible to achieve due to the underlying distributed technology of the Internet. Pseudonymity and data havens (such as Freenet) protect free speech using technologies that guarantee material cannot be removed and prevents the identification of authors. Technologically savvy users can often find ways to access blocked content. Nevertheless, blocking remains an effective means of limiting access to sensitive information for most users when censors, such as those in China, are able to devote significant resources to building and maintaining a comprehensive censorship system.

Views about the feasibility and effectiveness of Internet censorship have evolved in parallel with the development of the Internet and censorship technologies:

A 1993 Time Magazine article quotes computer scientist John Gillmore, one of the founders of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, as saying "The Net interprets censorship as damage and routes around it."

In November 2007, "Father of the Internet" Vint Cerf stated that he sees government control of the Internet failing because the Web is almost entirely privately owned.

A report of research conducted in 2007 and published in 2009 by the Beckman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard University stated that: "We are confident that the  tool developers will for the most part keep ahead of the governments' blocking efforts", but also that "...we believe that less than two percent of all filtered Internet users use circumvention tools".

In contrast, a 2011 report by researchers at the Oxford Internet Institute published by UNESCO concludes "... the control of information on the Internet and Web is certainly feasible, and technological advances do not therefore guarantee greater freedom of speech."

A BBC World Service poll of 27,973 adults in 26 countries, including 14,306 Internet users, was conducted between 30 November 2009 and 7 February 2010. The head of the polling organization felt, overall, that the poll showed that:

Despite worries about privacy and fraud, people around the world see access to the internet as their fundamental right. They think the web is a force for good, and most don't want governments to regulate it.

The poll found that nearly four in five (78%) Internet users felt that the Internet had brought them greater freedom, that most Internet users (53%) felt that "the internet should never be regulated by any level of government anywhere", and almost four in five Internet users and non-users around the world felt that access to the Internet was a fundamental right (50% strongly agreed, 29% somewhat agreed, 9% somewhat disagreed, 6% strongly disagreed, and 6% gave no opinion).

Social media

The rising usages of social media in many nations has led to the emergence of citizens organizing protests through social media, sometimes called "Twitter Revolutions". The most notable of these social media led protests were parts Arab Spring uprisings, starting in 2010. In response to the use of social media in these protests, the Tunisian government began a hack of Tunisian citizens' Facebook accounts, and reports arose of accounts being deleted.

Automated systems can be used to censor social media posts, and therefore limit what citizens can say online. This most notably occurs in China, where social media posts are automatically censored depending on content. In 2013, Harvard political science professor Gary King led a study to determine what caused social media posts to be censored and found that posts mentioning the government were not more or less likely to be deleted if they were supportive or critical of the government. Posts mentioning collective action were more likely to be deleted than those that had not mentioned collective action. Currently, social media censorship appears primarily as a way to restrict Internet users' ability to organize protests. For the Chinese government, seeing citizens unhappy with local governance is beneficial as state and national leaders can replace unpopular officials. King and his researchers were able to predict when certain officials would be removed based on the number of unfavorable social media posts.

Research has proved that criticism is tolerable on social media sites, therefore it is not censored unless it has a higher chance of collective action. It isn't important whether the criticism is supportive or unsupportive of the states' leaders, the main priority of censoring certain social media posts is to make sure that no big actions are being made due to something that was said on the internet. Posts that challenge the Party's political leading role in the Chinese government are more likely to be censored due to the challenges it poses to the Chinese Communist Party.

Video games

Main articles: Video game censorship and List of regionally censored video games

Since the early 1980s, advocates of video games have emphasized their use as an expressive medium, arguing for their protection under the laws governing freedom of speech and also as an educational tool. Detractors argue that video games are harmful and therefore should be subject to legislative oversight and restrictions. Many video games have certain elements removed or edited due to regional rating standards.
For example, in the Japanese and PAL Versions of No More Heroes, blood splatter and gore is removed from the gameplay. Decapitation scenes are implied, but not shown. Scenes of missing body parts after having been cut off, are replaced with the same scene, but showing the body parts fully intact.

Impact of surveillance

See also: Surveillance, Mass surveillance, and Computer and network surveillance

Surveillance and censorship are different. Surveillance can be performed without censorship, but it is harder to engage in censorship without some form of surveillance. Even when surveillance does not lead directly to censorship, the widespread knowledge or belief that a person, their computer, or their use of the Internet is under surveillance can have a "chilling effect" and lead to self-censorship.

Implementation

Censored pre-press proof of two articles from "Notícias da Amadora", a Portuguese newspaper, 1970

The former Soviet Union maintained a particularly extensive program of state-imposed censorship. The main organ for official censorship in the Soviet Union was the Chief Agency for Protection of Military and State Secrets generally known as the Glavlit, its Russian acronym. The Glavlit handled censorship matters arising from domestic writings of just about any kind – even beer and vodka labels. Glavlit censorship personnel were present in every large Soviet publishing house or newspaper; the agency employed some 70,000 censors to review information before it was disseminated by publishing houses, editorial offices, and broadcasting studios. No mass medium escaped Glavlit's control. All press agencies and radio and television stations had Glavlit representatives on their editorial staffs.

Sometimes, public knowledge of the existence of a specific document is subtly suppressed, a situation resembling censorship. The authorities taking such action will justify it by declaring the work to be "subversive" or "inconvenient". An example is Michel Foucault's 1978 text Sexual Morality and the Law (later republished as The Danger of Child Sexuality), originally published as La loi de la pudeur . This work defends the decriminalization of statutory rape and the abolition of age of consent laws.

When a publisher comes under pressure to suppress a book, but has already entered into a contract with the author, they will sometimes effectively censor the book by deliberately ordering a small print run and making minimal, if any, attempts to publicize it. This practice became known in the early 2000s as privishing (private publishing).

By country

Main article: Censorship by country

Censorship by country collects information on censorship, internet censorship, press freedom, freedom of speech, and human rights by country and presents it in a sortable table, together with links to articles with more information. In addition to countries, the table includes information on former countries, disputed countries, political sub-units within countries, and regional organizations.

Canada

Main article: Censorship in Canada

Cuba

Main article: Censorship in Cuba

Cuban media used to be operated under the supervision of the Communist Party's Department of Revolutionary Orientation, which "develops and coordinates propaganda strategies". Connection to the Internet is restricted and censored.

China

Main article: Censorship in China

The People's Republic of China employs sophisticated censorship mechanisms, referred to as the Golden Shield Project, to monitor the internet. Popular search engines such as Baidu also remove politically sensitive search results.

Eastern Bloc

Strict censorship existed in the Eastern Bloc. Throughout the bloc, the various ministries of culture held a tight rein on their writers. Cultural products there reflected the propaganda needs of the state. Party-approved censors exercised strict control in the early years. In the Stalinist period, even the weather forecasts were changed if they suggested that the sun might not shine on May Day. Under Nicolae Ceauşescu in Romania, weather reports were doctored so that the temperatures were not seen to rise above or fall below the levels which dictated that work must stop.

Possession and use of copying machines was tightly controlled in order to hinder production and distribution of samizdat, illegal self-published books and magazines. Possession of even a single samizdat manuscript such as a book by Andrei Sinyavsky was a serious crime which might involve a visit from the KGB. Another outlet for works which did not find favor with the authorities was publishing abroad.

France

Main article: Censorship in France

Amid declining car sales in 2020, France banned a television ad by a Dutch bike company, saying the ad "unfairly discredited the automobile industry".

India

Main article: Censorship in India

The Constitution of India guarantees freedom of expression, but places certain restrictions on content, with a view towards maintaining communal and religious harmony, given the history of communal tension in the nation. According to the Information Technology Rules 2011, objectionable content includes anything that "threatens the unity, integrity, defence, security or sovereignty of India, friendly relations with foreign states or public order".

Iran

Main article: Censorship in Iran

Iraq

Iraq under Baathist Saddam Hussein had much the same techniques of press censorship as did Romania under Nicolae Ceauşescu but with greater potential violence.

Malaysia

Under subsection 48(3) and (4) of the Penang Islamic Religious Administration Enactment 2004, non-Muslims in Malaysia are penalized for using the following words, or to write or publish them, in any form, version or translation in any language or for use in any publicity material in any medium:
"Allah", "Firman Allah", "Ulama", "Hadith", "Ibadah", "Kaabah", "Qadhi'", "Illahi", "Wahyu", "Mubaligh", "Syariah", "Qiblat", "Haji", "Mufti", "Rasul", "Iman", "Dakwah", "Wali", "Fatwa", "Imam", "Nabi", "Sheikh", "Khutbah", "Tabligh", "Akhirat", "Azan", "Al Quran", "As Sunnah", "Auliya'", "Karamah", "False Moon God", "Syahadah", "Baitullah", "Musolla", "Zakat Fitrah", "Hajjah", "Taqwa" and "Soleh".

North Korea

Main article: Censorship in North Korea

Serbia

See also: Censorship in Serbia

According to Christian Mihr, executive director of Reporters Without Borders, "censorship in Serbia is neither direct nor transparent, but is easy to prove."  According to Mihr there are numerous examples of censorship and self-censorship in Serbia  According to Mihr, Serbian prime minister Aleksandar Vučić has proved "very sensitive to criticism, even on critical questions," as was the case with Natalija Miletic, correspondent for Deutsche Welle Radio, who questioned him in Berlin about the media situation in Serbia and about allegations that some ministers in the Serbian government had plagiarized their diplomas, and who later received threats and offensive articles on the Serbian press.

Multiple news outlets have accused Vučić of anti-democratic strongman tendencies. In July 2014, journalists associations were concerned about the freedom of the media in Serbia, in which Vučić came under criticism.

In September 2015 five members of United States Congress (Edie Bernice Johnson, Carlos Curbelo, Scott Perry, Adam Kinzinger, and Zoe Lofgren) have informed Vice President of the United States Joseph Biden that Aleksandar's brother, Andrej Vučić, is leading a group responsible for deteriorating media freedom in Serbia.

Singapore

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Further information: Censorship in Singapore and Media censorship in Singapore

In the Republic of Singapore, Section 33 of the Films Act originally banned the making, distribution and exhibition of "party political films", at pain of a fine not exceeding $100,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years. The Act further defines a "party political film" as any film or video

(a) which is an advertisement made by or on behalf of any political party in Singapore or any body whose objects relate wholly or mainly to politics in Singapore, or any branch of such party or body; or

(b) which is made by any person and directed towards any political end in Singapore

In 2001, the short documentary called A Vision of Persistence on opposition politician J. B. Jeyaretnam was also banned for being a "party political film". The makers of the documentary, all lecturers at the Ngee Ann Polytechnic, later submitted written apologies and withdrew the documentary from being screened at the 2001 Singapore International Film Festival in April, having been told they could be charged in court. Another short documentary called Singapore Rebel by Martyn See, which documented Singapore Democratic Party leader Dr Chee Soon Juan's acts of civil disobedience, was banned from the 2005 Singapore International Film Festival on the same grounds and See is being investigated for possible violations of the Films Act.

This law, however, is often disregarded when such political films are made supporting the ruling People's Action Party (PAP). Channel NewsAsia's five-part documentary series on Singapore's PAP ministers in 2005, for example, was not considered a party political film.

Exceptions are also made when political films are made concerning political parties of other nations. Films such as Michael Moore's Fahrenheit 911 are thus allowed to screen regardless of the law.

Since March 2009, the Films Act has been amended to allow party political films as long as they were deemed factual and objective by a consultative committee. Some months later, this committee lifted the ban on Singapore Rebel.

Soviet Union

Main article: Censorship in the Soviet Union

Independent journalism did not exist in the Soviet Union until Mikhail Gorbachev became its leader; all reporting was directed by the Communist Party or related organizations. Pravda, the predominant newspaper in the Soviet Union, had a monopoly. Foreign newspapers were available only if they were published by communist parties sympathetic to the Soviet Union.

Spain

Main article: Censorship in Spain

Turkey

See also: Censorship in Turkey and 2017 block of Wikipedia in Turkey

Online access to all language versions of Wikipedia was blocked in Turkey on 29 April 2017 by Erdoğan's government.

United Kingdom

Main article: Censorship in the United Kingdom

United States

Main articles: Censorship in the United States and Book censorship in the United States

In the United States, censorship occurs through books, film festivals, politics, and public schools. See banned books for more information. Additionally, critics of campaign finance reform in the United States say this reform imposes widespread restrictions on political speech.

Uruguay

Censorship also takes place in capitalist nations, such as Uruguay. In 1973, a military coup took power in Uruguay, and the State practiced censorship. For example, writer Eduardo Galeano was imprisoned and later was forced to flee. His book Open Veins of Latin America was banned by the right-wing military government, not only in Uruguay, but also in Chile and Argentina.

See also

Freedom of speech portal

Journalism portal

Related articles

Amazon.com controversies

Book burning – Practice of destroying, often ceremoniously, books or other written material

Censorship (psychoanalysis)

Chilling effect

Censor bars

Clandestine literature

Cyber sovereignty

Election silence

Expurgation – A form of censorship of artistic or other media works

Federal Communications Commission – Independent agency of the U.S. Government

Hate speech

Human rights – Inalienable fundamental rights to which a person is inherently entitled

Index on Censorship – Campaigning publishing organisation, an organisation campaigning for freedom of expression, produces an award-winning quarterly magazine of the same name

Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on journalism – Consequences of COVID-19 outbreak for media and publishing

Laws against Holocaust denial

Market for loyalties theory

Media regulation

Motion Picture Production Code, also known as Hays Code – American film studio self-censorship rules

Nineteen Eighty-Four – 1949 dystopian novel by George Orwell
Minitrue

Thoughtcrime – Expression for unorthodox thoughts in the novel 1984

Thought Police – Secret police of Oceania in the novel Nineteen Eighty-Four

Open court principle

Scunthorpe problem – Problem with profanity on the Internet

Strategic lawsuit against public participation – Litigation to silence critics

Taboo – Societal or cultural prohibition

Video game controversies

Freedoms

Academic freedom – Moral and legal concept

Freedom of the press

Freedom of speech – Right to communicate one's opinions and ideas

Freedom of thought – Freedom of an individual to hold or consider a fact, viewpoint, or thought, independent of others' viewpoints

References

^ "David's Fig Leaf". Victoria and Albert Museum. Retrieved 29 May 2007.

^ "censorship noun". merriam-webster.com. Retrieved 30 January 2019.

^ "cen·sor·ship". ahdictionary.com. The American Heritage Dictionary. Archived from the original on 31 January 2019. Retrieved 30 January 2019.

^ "Definition of censorship in English". oxforddictionaries.com. Oxford Living Dictionaries. Retrieved 30 January 2019.

^ a b "censorship, n.", OED Online, Oxford University Press, June 2018, retrieved 8 August 2018

^ https://www.aclu.org/other/what-censorship "What Is Censorship", ACLU

^ Sui-Lee Wee; Ben Blanchard (June 4, 2012). "China blocks Tiananmen talk on crackdown anniversary". Reuters. Retrieved 2013-05-08.

^ M.F. Burnyeat (1997), The Impiety of Socrates Mathesis publications; Ancient Philosophy 17 Accessed November 23, 2017

^ Debra Nails, A Companion to Greek and Roman Political Thought Chapter 21 – The Trial and Death of Socrates John Wiley & Sons, 2012 ISBN 1-118-55668-2 Accessed November 23, 2017

^ Plato. Apology, 24–27.

^ Warren, J (2001). "Socratic suicide". J Hell Stud. 121: 91–106. doi:10.2307/631830. JSTOR 631830. PMID 19681231.

^ Linder, Doug (2002). "The Trial of Socrates". University of Missouri–Kansas City School of Law. Retrieved September 12, 2013.

^ "Socrates (Greek philosopher)". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved September 12, 2013.

^ R. G. Frey (January 1978).

^ "The Long History of Censorship", Mette Newth, Beacon for Freedom of Expression (Norway), 2010

^ "Internet Censorship is Absurd and Unconstitutional", Michael Landier, 4 June 1997

^ "The Trial of Lady Chatterley's Lover", Paul Gallagher, Dangerous Minds, 10 November 2010

^ "Child Pornography: Model Legislation & Global Review" (PDF) (5 ed.). International Centre for Missing & Exploited Children. 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-11-20. Retrieved 2012-08-25. Cite journal requires |journal= (help)CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ "World Congress against CSEC". Csecworldcongress.org. 2002-07-27. Archived from the original on March 16, 2012. Retrieved 2011-10-21.

^ Timothy Jay (2000). Why We Curse: A Neuro-psycho-social Theory of Speech. John Benjamins Publishing Company. pp. 208–209. ISBN 978-1-55619-758-1.

^ David Goldberg; Stefaan G. Verhulst; Tony Prosser (1998). Regulating the Changing Media: A Comparative Study. Oxford University Press. p. 207. ISBN 978-0-19-826781-2.

^ McCullagh, Declan (2003-06-30). "Microsoft's new push in Washington". CNET. Retrieved 2011-10-21.

^ Eberhard Demm: Censorship, in: 1914-1918-online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War.

^ "New York Times".

^ The Raw Story | Investigative News and Politics

^ Steele, Philip, 1948- (1992). Censorship. New Discovery Books. ISBN 0-02-735404-0. OCLC 24871121.CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)

^ "National Council Of Educational Research And Training :: Home (Page 105, Democratic Politics - Class 9)". ncert.nic.in. Retrieved 2017-12-12.

^ Bradbury, Ray. Fahrenheit 451. Del Rey Books. April 1991.

^ a b Lundqvist, J. "More pictures of Iranian Censorship". Archived from the original on 2011-04-29. Retrieved 2007-08-01.

^ Assange, Julian (2012). Cypherpunks : freedom and the future of the internet. Appelbaum, Jacob; Müller-Maguhn, Andy; Zimmermann, Jérémie. New York: OR Books. pp. 123–124. ISBN 978-1939293008. OCLC 812780303.

^ Pope-Weidemann, Marienna (13 September 2013). "Cypherpunks: Freedom and the Future of the Internet". Counterfire. Archived from the original on 7 May 2014. Retrieved 23 April 2019.

^ Green Illusions: The Dirty Secrets of Clean Energy and the Future of Environmentalism, Ozzie Zehner, University of Nebraska Press, 2012, 464 pp, ISBN 978-0-8032-3775-9. Retrieved 23 October 2013.

^ CLARK, Marilyn; GRECH, Anna (2017). Journalism under pressure. Unwarranted interference, fear and self-censorship in Europe. Strasbourg: Council of Europe publishing. Retrieved 12 May 2017.

^ "Self Censorship: How Often and Why". Pew Research Center.

^ "Journalists suffer violence, intimidation and self-censorship in Europe, says a Council of Europe study". Council of Europe. Newsroom. 20 April 2017. Archived from the original on 2017-05-11. Retrieved 12 May 2017.

^ Ian Mayes (2005-04-23). "The readers' editor on requests that are always refused". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 2007-08-01.

^ Barber, Lynn (2002-01-27). "Caution: big name ahead". The Observer. London. Retrieved 2007-08-01.

^ Wu, Tim, "Is the First Amendment Obsolete?" (November 1, 2017). Columbia Public Law Research Paper No. 14-573. Also available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3096337 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3096337 

^ "Why China is letting 'Django Unchained' slip through its censorship regime". Quartz. March 13, 2013.

^ "What is Music Censorship?". Freemuse.org. 1 January 2001. Archived from the original on 6 November 2008. Retrieved 2008-10-25.

^ Jenna Johnson (2007-07-22). "Google's View of D.C. Melds New and Sharp, Old and Fuzzy". News. Washington Post. Retrieved 2007-07-22.

^ Freedberg, David. "The Fear of Art: How Censorship Becomes Iconoclasm". Social Research. 83: 67–99 – via eHOST.

^ "Paedophile artist's photographs and paintings 'must be destroyed'". The Independent. 2015-10-13. Retrieved 2015-10-16.

^ "Graham Ovenden | Tate". 2015-10-16. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved 2015-10-16.

^ Ashley, John; Jayousi, Nedal (December 2013). "The Connection between Palestinian Culture and the Conflict" (PDF). Discourse, Culture, and Education in the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict. netanya.ac.il (Report). Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung, Israel Office. p. 55. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 February 2019. Retrieved 21 May 2017. In 1980, Israel banned art exhibitions and paintings of "political significance", with the grouping of the four colours of the Palestinian flag in any one painting also forbidden.

^ Kifner, John (October 16, 1993). "Ramallah Journal; A Palestinian Version of the Judgment of Solomon". The New York Times. Retrieved May 21, 2010.

^ Dalrymple, William (October 2, 2002). "A culture under fire". The Guardian. London. Retrieved May 21, 2010.

^ "The watermelon makes a colourful interlude". The Age. Melbourne. September 12, 2004.

^ Chatterjee, Deen K. (2011), "Guantanamo Bay Prisoners", Encyclopedia of Global Justice, Springer Netherlands, p. 467, doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-9160-5_1038, ISBN 9781402091599

^ "censorship-reports-nigeria-abachas-media-crackdown-apr-1997-35-pp". doi:10.1163/2210-7975_hrd-2210-0161. Cite journal requires |journal= (help)

^ "Introduction: The Site of the Social", Site Reading, Princeton University Press, 2016-01-31, pp. 1–24, doi:10.1515/9781400873807-002, ISBN 9781400873807

^ 
"Freedom on the Net 2018" (PDF). Freedom House. November 2018. Retrieved 1 November 2018.

^ OpenNet Initiative "Summarized global Internet filtering data spreadsheet", 8 November 2011 and "Country Profiles", the OpenNet Initiative is a collaborative partnership of the Citizen Lab at the Munk School of Global Affairs, University of Toronto; the Berkman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard University; and the SecDev Group, Ottawa

^ "Internet Enemies", Enemies of the Internet 2014: Entities at the heart of censorship and surveillance, Reporters Without Borders (Paris), 11 March 2014. Retrieved 24 June 2014.

^ Internet Enemies, Reporters Without Borders (Paris), 12 March 2012 Archived March 23, 2012, at the Wayback Machine

^ Due to legal concerns the OpenNet Initiative does not check for filtering of child pornography and because their classifications focus on technical filtering, they do not include other types of censorship.

^ a b c Freedom of Connection, Freedom of Expression: The Changing Legal and Regulatory Ecology Shaping the Internet, Dutton, William H.; Dopatka, Anna; Law, Ginette; Nash, Victoria, Division for Freedom of Expression, Democracy and Peace, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), Paris, 2011, 103 pp., ISBN 978-92-3-104188-4

^ "BYLAWS FOR INTERNET CORPORATION FOR ASSIGNED NAMES AND NUMBERS | A California Nonprofit Public-Benefit Corporation - ICANN". www.icann.org. Retrieved 2020-04-28.

^ "ICANN". www.icann.org. Retrieved 2020-04-28.

^ Wakefield, Jane (2010-12-07). "Wikileaks' struggle to stay online". BBC News. Retrieved 2020-04-28.

^ "Operation In Our Sites". www.ice.gov. Retrieved 2020-04-28.

^ Internet Architecture Board. "IAB Technical Comment on the Unique DNS Root". tools.ietf.org. Retrieved 2020-04-28.

^ "First Nation in Cyberspace", Philip Elmer-Dewitt, Time, 6 December 1993, No. 49

^ "Cerf sees government control of Internet failing", Pedro Fonseca, Reuters, 14 November 2007

^ 2007 Circumvention Landscape Report: Methods, Uses, and Tools, Hal Roberts, Ethan Zuckerman, and John Palfrey, Beckman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard University, March 2009

^ For the BBC poll Internet users are those who used the Internet within the previous six months.

^ "BBC Internet Poll: Detailed Findings", BBC World Service, 8 March 2010

^ "Internet access is 'a fundamental right'", BBC News, 8 March 2010

^ Madrigal, Alexis C. (24 January 2011). "The Inside Story of How Facebook Responded to Tunisian Hacks". The Atlantic. Retrieved 2016-04-15.

^ King, Gary; Pan, Jennifer (2014). "Reverse-engineering censorship in China: Randomized experimentation and participant observation". Science. 345 (6199): 1251722. doi:10.1126/science.1251722. PMID 25146296.

^ "Professor Gary King, Inaugural Government Regius Lecture 2015". Vimeo. 2016-01-14. Retrieved 2016-04-12.

^ Shao, Li (11/01/2018). "The Dilemma of Criticism: Disentangling the Determinants of Media Censorship in China". Journal of East Asian Studies. 18 (3): 279–297. doi:10.1017/jea.2018.19. Check date values in: |date= (help)

^ Byrd P. "It's all fun and games until somebody gets hurt: the effectiveness of proposed video game regulation." Archived 2015-09-24 at the Wayback Machine Houston Law Review 2007. Accessed 19 March 2007.

^ "A Hornet's Nest Over Violent Video Games", James D. Ivory and Malte Elson, The Chronicle of Higher Education (Washington), 16 October 2013.

^ gamesradararchive (19 October 2012). "No More Heroes - Censored gameplay 12-07-07" – via YouTube.

^ "Censorship is inseparable from surveillance", Cory Doctorow, The Guardian, 2 March 2012

^ "Online Censorship : Ubiquitous Big Brother, witchhunt for dissidents", WeFightCensorship.org, Reporters Without Borders, retrieved 12 March 2013

^ Koltsova, Olessia (2006-09-27). "News Media and Power in Russia". doi:10.4324/9780203536971. Cite journal requires |journal= (help)

^ Winkler, David (11 July 2002). "Journalists Thrown 'Into the Buzzsaw'". CommonDreams.org. Archived from the original on August 4, 2007.

^ "10 most censored countries". The Committee to Protect Journalists.

^ "Going online in Cuba: Internet under surveillance" (PDF). Reporters Without Borders. 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-03-03.

^ "Baidu's Internal Monitoring and Censorship Document Leaked (1)". China Digital Times (CDT).

^ "Baidu's Internal Monitoring and Censorship Document Leaked (2)". China Digital Times (CDT).

^ "Baidu's Internal Monitoring and Censorship Document Leaked (3)". China Digital Times (CDT).

^ Major & Mitter 2004, p. 6

^ a b Major & Mitter 2004, p. 15

^ a b c Crampton 1997, p. 247

^ "France bans Dutch bike TV ad for creating 'climate of fear' about cars".

^ "The Constitution of India Archived 24 November 2010 at the Wayback Machine" "658.79 KiB". Missing or empty |url= (help)658.79 KiB, India Code. Retrieved 3 June 2006.

^ "Uncle dictates, cyber boys dispose - Sibal to work on norms for social sites". The Telegraph. Calcutta, India. 7 December 2011. Archived from the original on 22 March 2016. Retrieved 2 June 2020.

^ Svolik, Milan W., "The World of Authoritarian Politics", The Politics of Authoritarian Rule, Cambridge University Press, pp. 19–50, ISBN 978-1-139-17604-0, retrieved 2020-05-29

^ "Check law first, Karpal asks Penang government over decree banning 'Islamic words'". Malaysia Insider. Archived from the original on 2014-01-15.

^ "Penang mufti outlaws 40 words to non-Muslims". New Straits Times. 2014. Archived from the original on 2014-01-11.

^ "browser – IE6 PAGE TITLE". mufti.penang.gov.my. Archived from the original on April 21, 2014. Retrieved 2014-09-14.

^ Censorship in Serbia is easy to prove - RWB, B92, 19/02/2015. Retrieved 12/10/2016

^ a b B92, 19/02/2015. Retrieved 12/10/2016

^ Filipovic, Gordana (March 27, 2017). "How a Premier May Become a Strongman in Serbia: QuickTake Q&A". Bloomberg. Retrieved 2018-09-18.

^ Nougayrède, Natalie (2018-04-11). "Beware the chameleon strongmen of Europe". the Guardian. Retrieved 2018-09-18.

^ Karnitschnig, Matthew (2016-04-14). "Serbia's latest would-be savior is a modernizer, a strongman – or both". Politico Europe. Retrieved 2018-09-18.

^ Janjevic, Darko (June 18, 2017). "EU and the Balkans: Brussels' favorite strongmen". DW. Retrieved 2018-09-18.

^ Anastasijevic, Dejan (April 4, 2017). "Serbia's Vucic stronger than ever". EU Observer. Retrieved 2018-09-18.

^ Die Tageszeitung:Die Pampigkeit des Herrn Vučić - In Serbien werden Internetseiten attackiert, Blogs gesperrt und Blogger festgenommen. Die Betroffenen berichteten wohl zu kritisch über die Regierung (German) - The stroppiness of Mr. Vučić - In Serbia being attacked websites, blocked blogs and arrested bloggers. The victims reported probably too critical about the government

^ Die Tageszeitung:"Serbische Regierung zensiert Medien - Ein Virus namens Zensur", taz.de; accessed 9 December 2015.(in German)

^ Čogradin, Snežana (4 November 2016). "What is Andrej Vučić occupation?". Danas.

^ "Turkish authorities block Wikipedia without giving reason". BBC News. 29 April 2017.

^ "Books". National Coalition Against Censorship. Retrieved 2016-04-11.

^ "The Trick of Campaign Finance Reform". Christian Science Monitor.

^ "Felonious Advocacy". reason.

^ "Fresh Off Worldwide Attention for Joining Obama's Book Collection, Uruguayan Author Eduardo Galeano Returns with "Mirrors: Stories of Almost Everyone. Democracynow.org. 28 May 2009. Retrieved 2011-10-21.

Works cited

Crampton, R. J. (1997), Eastern Europe in the Twentieth Century and After, Routledge, ISBN 978-0-415-16422-1

Major, Patrick; Mitter, Rana (2004), "East is East and West is West?", in Major, Patrick (ed.), Across the Blocs: Exploring Comparative Cold War Cultural and Social History, Taylor & Francis, Inc., ISBN 978-0-7146-8464-2

Further reading

 Library resources about

Censorship

* * *

Resources in your library

Resources in other libraries

Abbott, Randy. "A Critical Analysis of the Library-Related Literature Concerning Censorship in Public Libraries and Public School Libraries in the United States During the 1980s." Project for degree of Education Specialist, University of South Florida, December 1987.

Birmingham, Kevin, "The Most Dangerous Book: The Battle for James Joyce's Ulysses", London (Head of Zeus Ltd), 2014, ISBN 978-1594203367

Burress, Lee. Battle of the Books. Metuchen, NJ: The Scarecrow Press, 1989.

Butler, Judith, "Excitable Speech: A Politics of the Performative"(1997)

Foucault, Michel, edited by Lawrence D. Kritzman. Philosophy, Culture: interviews and other writings 1977–1984 (New York/London: 1988, Routledge, ISBN 0-415-90082-4) (The text Sexual Morality and the Law is Chapter 16 of the book).

Gilbert, Nora. "Better Left Unsaid: Victorian Novels, Hays Code Films, and the Benefits of Censorship." Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2013.

Wittern-Keller, Laura. Freedom of the Screen: Legal Challenges to State Film Censorship, 1915–1981. University Press of Kentucky 2008

Hoffman, Frank. "Intellectual Freedom and Censorship." Metuchen, NJ: The Scarecrow Press, 1989.

Mathiesen, Kay Censorship and Access to Information Handbook of Information and Computer Ethics, Kenneth E. Himma, Herman T. Tavani, eds., John Wiley and Sons, New York, 2008

National Coalition against Censorship (NCAC). "Books on Trial: A Survey of Recent Cases." January 1985.

Parker, Alison M. (1997). "Purifying America: Women, Cultural Reform, and Pro-Censorship Activism, 1873–1933," University of Illinois Press.

Biltereyst, Daniel, ed. Silencing Cinema. Palgrave/Macmillan, 2013.

Ringmar, Erik A Blogger's Manifesto: Free Speech and Censorship in the Age of the Internet (London: Anthem Press, 2007)

Terry, John David II. "Censorship: Post Pico." In "School Law Update, 1986," edited by Thomas N. Jones and Darel P. Semler.

Silber, Radomír. Partisan media and modern censorship: media influence on Czech political partisanship and the media's creation of limits to public opposition and control of exercising power in the Czech Republic in the 1990s. First edition. Brno: Tribun EU, 2017. 86 stran. Librix.eu. ISBN 978-80-263-1174-4.

Silber, Radomír. (2018) On Modern Censorship in Public Service Broadcasting. Cultural and Religious Studies, Volume 3, 2018, ISSN 2328-2177.

Articles related to censorship

v

t

e

Censorship

Media regulation 
Books
books banned

Films
banned films

Internet
circumvention

Music

Postal

Press

Radio

Speech and expression

Thought

Video games
banned video games

Methods 
Bleeping

Book burning

Broadcast delay

Burying of scholars

Censor bars

Chilling effect

Concision

Conspiracy of silence

Content-control software

Euphemism
Minced oath

Expurgation

Fogging

Gag order

Heckling

Heckler's veto

Internet police

Memory hole

National intranet

Newspaper theft

Pixelization

Prior restraint

Propaganda

Purge

Revisionism

Sanitization

Self-censorship

Speech code

Strategic lawsuit

Surveillance
computer and network

mass

Whitewashing

Word filtering

Damnatio memoriae

Contexts 
Criminal

Corporate

Hate speech
Online

Ideological

LGBT issues

Media bias

Moralistic fallacy

Naturalistic fallacy

Politics

Propaganda model

Religious

Suppression of dissent

Systemic bias

By country 
Censorship
Chinese issues overseas

Freedom of speech

Internet censorship

v

t

e

Media manipulation

Context 
Bias

Crowd psychology

Deception

Dumbing down

False balance

Half-truths

Machiavellianism

Media

Obfuscation

Orwellian

Persuasion

Psychological manipulation

Activism 
Alternative media

Boycott

Call-out culture

Cancel culture

Civil disobedience

Culture jamming

Demonstrations

Deplatforming

Guerrilla communication

Hacktivism

Internet

Media

Occupations

Petitions

Protests

Youth

Advertising 
Billboards

False

Infomercials

Mobiles

Modeling

Radio

Sex

Slogans

Testimonials

TV

Criticism of advertising

Annoyance factor

Censorship

Media regulation

Books

Broadcast law

Burying of scholars

Catch and kill

Corporate

Cover-ups

Euphemism

Films

Historical negationism

Internet

Political

Religious

Self

Hoaxing 
Alternative facts

April Fools'

Fake news
websites

Fakelore

Fictitious entries

Forgery

Gaslighting

List

Literary

Racial

Urban legend

Virus

Marketing 
Branding

Loyalty

Product

Product placement

Publicity

Research

Word of mouth

News media 
Agenda-setting

Broadcasting

Circus

Cycle

False balance

Infotainment

Managing

Narcotizing dysfunction

Newspeak

Pseudo-event

Scrum

Sensationalism

Tabloid journalism

Political campaigning 
Advertising

Astroturfing

Attack ad

Canvassing

Character assassination

Charm offensive

Dog-whistle politics

Election promises

Lawn signs

Manifestos

Name recognition

Negative

Push polling

Smear campaign

Wedge issue

Propaganda 
Bandwagon

Crowd manipulation

Disinformation

Fearmongering

Framing

Indoctrination

Loaded language

Lying press

National mythology

Rally 'round the flag effect

Techniques

Psychological warfare 
Airborne leaflets

False flag

Fifth column

Information (IT)

Lawfare

Political

Public diplomacy

Sedition

Subversion

Public relations 
Cult of personality

Doublespeak

Non-apology apology

Reputation management

Slogans

Sound bites

Spin

Transfer

Understatement

Weasel words

Sales 
Cold calling

Door-to-door

Pricing

Product demonstrations

Promotion

Promotional merchandise

Telemarketing

Related 
Media bias
United States

Media concentration

Media democracy

Media ecology

Media ethics

Media franchise

Media influence

Media proprietor

v

t

e

Propaganda techniques

Ad hominem

Appeal to fear

Atrocity propaganda

Bandwagon effect

Big lie

Blood libel

Buzzword

Censorship

Cherry picking

Code word

Disinformation

Dog-whistle politics

Doublespeak

Fake news

Flag-waving

Framing

Glittering generality

Historical negationism

Historical revisionism

Ideograph

Indoctrination

Lawfare

Loaded language

Newspeak

Obscurantism

Plain folks

Propaganda of the deed

Public relations

Rally 'round the flag effect

Slogan

Spin

Weasel word

Whataboutism

v

t

e

Internet censorship and surveillance by country

Africa 
Algeria

Angola

Botswana

Burkina Faso

Burundi

Cameroon

Central African Republic

Chad

Congo DR

Congo RO

Egypt

Eritrea

Ethiopia

Gambia

Ghana

Guinea

Guinea-Bissau

Ivory Coast

Kenya

Lesotho

Liberia

Libya

Madagascar

Malawi

Mauritania

Morocco (Western Sahara)

Mozambique

Namibia

Niger

Nigeria

Rwanda

Senegal

Sierra Leone

Somalia

South Africa

Sudan

Swaziland

Tanzania

Togo

Tunisia

Zambia

Zimbabwe

Americas 
Argentina

Bahamas

Barbados

Belize

Bolivia

Brazil

Canada

Chile

Colombia

Costa Rica

Cuba

Dominican Republic

Ecuador

El Salvador

Greenland

Guatemala

Guyana

Haiti

Honduras

Jamaica

Mexico

Nicaragua

Panama

Paraguay

Peru

Suriname

Trinidad and Tobago

United States
Puerto Rico

Uruguay

Venezuela

Asia 
Afghanistan

Bahrain

Bangladesh

Bhutan

Cambodia

China

East Timor

Hong Kong

India

Indonesia

Iran

Iraq

Japan

Jordan

Kuwait

Kyrgyzstan

Malaysia

Mongolia

Myanmar

Nepal

North Korea

Oman

Pakistan

Palestinian territories

Philippines

Qatar

Saudi Arabia

Singapore

South Korea

Sri Lanka

Syria

Taiwan

Tajikistan

Thailand

Turkmenistan

United Arab Emirates

Uzbekistan

Vietnam

Yemen

Europe 
Albania

Armenia

Austria

Azerbaijan

Belarus

Belgium

Bosnia and Herzegovina

Bulgaria

Croatia

Cyprus

Czech Republic

Denmark

Estonia

Finland

France

Germany (YouTube video blocking)

Georgia

Greece

Hungary

Iceland

Ireland

Italy

Kazakhstan

Latvia

Lithuania

Moldova

Montenegro

Netherlands

North Macedonia

Poland

Portugal

Romania

Russia

Serbia

Slovakia

Slovenia

Spain

Sweden

Switzerland

Turkey

Ukraine

United Kingdom

Oceania 
Australia

Fiji

New Zealand

Papua New Guinea

v

t

e

Censorship and websites

Censorship of 
Chinese issues overseas

Facebook

File sharing sites

GitHub

iTunes Store

The Pirate Bay

Twitter

WikiLeaks
Reception

in the United States

Wikipedia
in Turkey

in Venezuela

YouTube
in Germany

Censorship by 
AOL

Apple

Cisco in China

Facebook

Twitter

Yahoo

Google
YouTube

Microsoft in China
Skype in China

Myspace
in China

Websites blocked in 
Belgium

Mainland China

India

Russia
list

South Korea
North Korean

United Kingdom
list

Authority control 
GND: 4067601-8

HDS: 024656

NARA: 10637739

NDL: 00565505

 Wikiquote has quotations related to: Censorship
