Keng Hung" redirects here. For the modern city, see Jinghong.

For the Hong Kong Olympic sprinter, see Chiang Wai Hung.

Chiang Hung State

Keng Hung

1180–1950

Chiang Hung (Chiang Hoong) on a 19th century map including the Chinese Shan States

Status the Shan States under the suzerainty of Burma and Siam and China (1180– 1892)

Native Chiefdom of China (1892–1950)

Capital Chiang Hung (present day Xishuangbanna Dai Autonomous Prefecture)

History

• Chiang Hung state established

1180

• Annexed by China

1950

Today part of China

Chiang Hung, Sipsongpanna or Keng Hung (Thai: เมืองหอคำเชียงรุ่ง; Mueang Ho Kham Chiang Rung, Chinese: 車里 or 江洪) was one of the states of Shans under the suzerainty of Burma and China.

Chiang Hung was inhabited mainly by Tai Lü people, a branch of the Shans or Tai, hence its other name Meung Lu. Its capital was the city of Chiang Hung, modern Jinghong. The kingdom, in its most powerful state in the 13th century, covered a large area before being overwhelmed by neighboring powers such as the Yuan dynasty, the Lanna kingdom, and the Burmese Empire. Chinese dynasties recognized the local leaders as tusi of Cheli (Chinese: 車里宣慰使).

Contents

1 History

1.1 Early history

1.2 Dynastic struggle

1.3 Later history and legacy

2 Bibliography

3 See also

4 References

5 External links

History

The history of the state can be divided in two periods:

Early Period 1180 - 1290
Chao Phaya Chueang (Pa Zhen) 1180 - 1192

Khai Loeung (Ka Leng) 1192 - 12..

Thao Ai p. 1290

Later Period (State under Chinese suzerainty until annexation) 1312 - 1805

Early history

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Phanya Coeng, Paya Jueang (Thai: พญาเจื่อง) or Chao Jueang Han (Thai: เจ้าเจื่องหาญ) was said to wage wars with the native Akha and other Tai peoples in the area and established the kingdom in favor of Tai Lü people at Chiang Hung or Heo Kam on the Mekong in 1180. In the early 13th century, King Inmueng greatly expanded Heokam territories. The tributaries of Heokam kingdom includes Kengtung, Ngoenyang, Meuang Thaeng (modern Dien Bien Phu – the capital of Tai Dam people), and Xieng Thong (Luang Prabang), making Heokam the sole leader of Tai kingdoms in the north. The Tai Lü people then began scattering throughout Heokam’s area of influence.

However, Heokam then fell to the Mongol invasions in 1292 and became a tributary of Yuan dynasty. The Mongols granted the title Chao Saenwi Fa (Thai: เจ้าแสนหวีฟ้า) and the surname of Dao to the Kings of Chiang Hung. The power vacuum in the area was filled by newly formed Lanna kingdom evolving from Ngoenyang state. Mangrai the Great of Lanna put Chiang Hung under Lanna tributary. However, Lanna authority weakened in the early 16th century and Heokam enjoyed a brief period of autonomy until Lanna was conquered by Burmese Toungoo dynasty in 1558. The Burmese under Bayinnaung had already put the area under its control and Chiang Hung became a Burmese tributary. The Burmese divided Heokam into twelve pans (administration units), translated by the Tai Lü people Sipsong Panna (i.e. Twelve districts). Sipsong Panna served as the battlegrounds between Burma and the Qing dynasty.

Heokam faced three centuries of Burmese rule. In efforts to recover the manpower taken by Burma, Buddha Yodfa Chulalok ordered Prince Adthavorapaño of Nan to invade Kengtung and Chiang Hung to gather the Tai peoples there into Nan and other Lanna cities. Today, Nan hosts the largest Tai Lue community in Thailand. Also King Kawila of Chiang Mai invaded Chiang Hung to get the people. The Tai Lue people and culture therefore surged into Lanna.

Dynastic struggle

A dynastic struggle in 1847 brought chaos to Chiang Hung. According to Siamese chronicles King Mahawan of Chiang Hung died in 1847, to be succeeded by his son Prince Sarawan. However, Mahawan's uncle Prince Mahakhanan took the throne. Prince Sarawan fled to Dali in dismay and sought supports from Qing dynasty. Sarawan returned and killed Mahakhanan, Mahakhanan's son, Prince Nokam, went to Ava to gain supports from Pagan Min. The Burmese invaded and took Chiang Hung - culminating a large Tai Lue emigration into Lanna. Prince Nokam was then crowned but was later killed by his own nobles. Ava then re-installed Sarawan as the king.

Sarawan's brother, Oalnawudh, fled to Luang Prabang and proceeded to Bangkok in 1852. The Siamese nobles then saw this as an opportunity to gain control over Shan States and Chiang Hung and planned to take Kengtung on the way to Chiang Hung. The Siamese invaded the north but were unable to penetrate the mountainous highlands. In 1855, another attempt was made to march to Chiang Hung but yet failed.

Later history and legacy

Chiang Hung then came under the suzerainty of Qing dynasty for about a century. After the Chinese Empire was overthrown, the kingdom status of Chiang Hung technically ended. However, Republic of China continued to recognize local leaders as tusi. The last chieftain of Jinghong, Dao Shixun, attended the foundation ceremony of the People's Republic of China in 1949, and later became president of the Yunnan Minzu Institute. Xishuangbanna Dai Autonomous Region was established in 1953 and became an autonomous prefecture in 1955. A former tusi of Mengpeng, Shao Cunxin, was the head of Xishuangbanna government from 1953 to 1992.

Following constant warfare in the late 18th century, a large number of Tai Lue people were displaced. Nowadays some Tai Lue settlements can be found in the northern provinces of Thailand and Laos.

Some members of the ruling family fled to northern Thailand in 1949. Dao Shixun visited them in 1986.

Bibliography

Fred. W. Carey. A Trip to the Chinese Shan States The Geographical Journal Vol. 14, No. 4 (Oct., 1899), pp. 378-394

Henry Rodolph Davies. Yün-nan: The Link Between India and the Yangtze, Cambridge University Press, 2010 ISBN 9781108010795

Charles Patterson Giersch, Asian Borderlands: The Transformation of Qing China's Yunnan Frontier, Harvard University Press, 2006 ISBN 9780674021716

See also

Shan States

Tai peoples

Köng-ma, one of the largest Chinese Shan States

References

^ "Gazetteer of Upper Burma and the Shan states"

^ Kanbawsa - A Modern Review

^ Che-li Pacification Superintendency (車里軍民府)

^ แม่น้ำโขง แม่น้ำแห่งอุษาคเนย์ : เชียงรุ่ง (๑)

^  Archived July 30, 2012, at the Wayback Machine

External links

The Shan

v

t

e

Shan States and related petty kingdoms

Northern Shan States 
Hsenwi State

Mongmit

Hsipaw

North Hsenwi

South Hsenwi

Hsumhsai

Manglon

Mongleng

Monglong

Mongtung

Tawngpeng

Southern Shan States

Eastern Division 
Kehsi Mansam

Kenglon

Kengtawng

Mawkmai

Monghsu/Mongsang

Mongkung

Kenghkam

Mongnawng

Mongnai

Mongpan

Mongpawn

Mongsit

Southern Shan States

Central Division 
Hopong

Hsatung

Laihka

Lawksawk

Mongping

Mongpai

Namhkok

Nawngwawn

Sakoi

Samka

Wanyin

Southern Shan States

Myelat Division 
Hsamonghkam

Kyawkku

Kyong

Loi ai

Loilong

Loimaw

Maw

Mawnang

Mawson

Namhkai

Namhkom

Namtok

Pangtara

Pangmi

Poila

Yengan

Southern Shan States

Kengtung & Yawnghwe 
Kengtung

Yawnghwe

Hsihkip

Kengcheng

Mongyawng

Hsenyawt

Hsenmawng

Monghsat

Mongpu

Chinese Shan States 
Chiang Hung

Hsikwan

Momien

Mong Lem

Mong-La

Mong Mao

Mong-Santa

Mangshih

Mong-Yin

Related states and outliers 
Hsawnghsup

Singaling Hkamti

Hkamti Long

Siamese Shan States

Wa States

Kokang

Mongkawng

Mongyang

Pong

Wanmaw

Wuntho

Karenni States (Western Karenni/Kantarawadi)

Federated Shan states

List of rulers of Shan states

Princely state

Saopha
