"The chief justice is the presiding member of a supreme court in any of many countries with a justice system based on English common law, such as the Supreme Court of Bangladesh, the Supreme Court of Canada, the Supreme Court of Singapore, the Court of Final Appeal of Hong Kong, the Supreme Court of Japan, the Supreme Court of India, the Supreme Court of Pakistan, the Supreme Court of Nigeria, the Supreme Court of Nepal, the Constitutional Court of South Africa, the Supreme Court of Ireland, the Supreme Court of New Zealand, the High Court of Australia, the Supreme Court of the United States, and provincial or state supreme courts/high courts.

The situation is slightly different in the three legal jurisdictions within the United Kingdom. The courts of England and Wales are headed by the Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales; in Northern Ireland's courts, the equivalent position is the Lord Chief Justice of Northern Ireland, and in the courts of Scotland the head of the judiciary of Scotland is the Lord President of the Court of Session, who is also Lord Justice General of Scotland. These three judges are not, though, part of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom, which operates across all three jurisdictions and is headed by the President of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom.

The chief justice can be selected in many ways, but, in many nations, the position is given to the most senior justice of the court, while, in the United States, it is often the President's most important political nomination, subject to approval by the United States Senate. Although the title of this top American jurist is, by statute, Chief Justice of the United States, the term "Chief Justice of the Supreme Court" is often used unofficially.

In some courts, the chief justice has a different title, e.g. president of the supreme court. In other courts, the title of chief justice is used, but the court has a different name, e.g. the Supreme Court of Judicature in colonial (British) Ceylon, and the Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia (in the US state of West Virginia).

Contents

1 Competence

2 List of chief justice positions

3 See also

4 References

Competence

The Chief Justice's personal ruling is equal in weight to the rulings of any associate judges on the court.

In several countries, the chief justice is second in line to the office of president or governor general (or third in line, if there is a president or governor lieutenant governor general), should the incumbent die or resign. For example, if the Governor General of Canada is unable to perform his or her duties, the Chief Justice of Canada performs the duties of the governor general.

Apart from their intrinsic role in litigation, they may have additional responsibilities, such as swearing in high officers of state; for instance, the Chief Justice of the United States traditionally administers the oath of office at the inauguration ceremony of the President of the United States, as does the Chief Justice of South Africa at the inauguration of the President of South Africa. In some countries, such as the United States, the Chief Justice is also responsible for presiding over certain legislative matters, such as during the impeachment trial of a president.

List of chief justice positions

Bailiff of Guernsey

Bailiff of Jersey

Chief Justice of Albania

Chief Justice of Antigua

Chief Justice of Australia
Chief Justice of New South Wales

Chief Justice of Queensland

Chief Justice of South Australia

Chief Justice of Tasmania

Chief Justice of Victoria

Chief Justice of Western Australia

Chief Justice of the Bahamas

Chief Justice of Bangladesh

Chief Justice of Barbados

Chief Justice of Belize

Chief Justice of Bermuda

Chief Justice of Borneo

Chief Justice of Brazil

Chief Justice of Canada
Chief Justice of Alberta

Chief Justice of British Columbia

Chief Justice of Prince Edward Island

Chief Justice of Manitoba

Chief Justice of New Brunswick

Chief Justice of Newfoundland and Labrador

Chief Justice of Nova Scotia

Chief Justice of Ontario

Chief Justice of Quebec

Chief Justice of Saskatchewan

Chief Justice of the People's Republic of China 

Chief Justice of Cyprus

Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Estonia

Chief Justice of Fiji

Chief Justice of Gibraltar

Chief Justice of Grenada

Chief Justice of Hong Kong

Chief Justice of Hungary

Chief Justice of India
Chief Justice of the Bombay High Court

Chief Justice of Gujarat

Chief Justice of the Patna High Court

Chief Justice of Rajasthan

Chief Justice of Uttarakhand

Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Indonesia
Chief Justice of the Constitutional Court of Indonesia

Chief Justice of Ireland

Chief Justice of Jamaica

Chief Justice of Japan

Chief Justice of Kenya

Chief Justice of the Republic of Korea

Chief Justice of the Leeward Islands

Chief Justice of Liberia

Chief Justice of Malta

Chief Justice of Malaysia

Chief Justice of the Federated States of Micronesia

Chief Justice of Namibia

Chief Justice of Nauru

Chief Justice of Nepal

Chief Justice of New Zealand

Chief Justice of Nyasaland

Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Nigeria

Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Norway

Chief Justice of Pakistan
Chief Justices of the Federal Shariat Court

Chief Justice of the Islamabad High Court

Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the Philippines

Chief Justice of Singapore

Chief Justice of Sri Lanka

Chief Justice of South Africa

Chief Justice of St Lucia

Chief Justice of St Vincent

Chief Justice of Sudan

Chief Justice of Tanzania
Chief Justice of Zanzibar

Chief Justice of Tonga

Chief Justice of Trinidad and Tobago

President of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom
Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales

Lord President of the Court of Session and Lord Justice General of Scotland

Lord Chief Justice of Northern Ireland

Chief Justice of the United States

See also

Associate justice

Puisne judge

Chief Justice of the Common Pleas

Lord President of the Supreme Court

Chief judge

References

^ Judges Law of the People's Republic of China, Article 16: "Judges are divided into twelve grades. The President of the Supreme People's Court is the Chief Justice."

v

t

e

Chief justices of state supreme courts

Chief Justice of the United States: John Roberts

AL

Tom Parker

AK

Joel Bolger

AZ

Robert M. Brutinel

AR

John Dan Kemp

CA

Tani Cantil-Sakauye

CO

Nathan B. Coats

CT

Richard A. Robinson

DE

Collins J. Seitz Jr.

FL

Charles T. Canady1

GA

Harold Melton

HI

Mark E. Recktenwald

ID

Roger S. Burdick

IL

Anne M. Burke

IN

Loretta Rush

IA

Susan Christensen

KS

Marla Luckert

KY

John D. Minton Jr.

LA

Bernette Joshua Johnson

ME

Andrew Mead (Acting)

MD

Mary Ellen Barbera

MA

Ralph Gants

MI

Bridget Mary McCormack

MN

Lorie Skjerven Gildea

MS

Michael K. Randolph

MO

George W. Draper III

MT

Mike McGrath

NE

Michael Heavican

NV

Kristina Pickering

NH

Gary E. Hicks (Acting)

NJ

Stuart Rabner

NM

Michael E. Vigil1

NY

Janet DiFiore

NC

Cheri Beasley

ND

Jon J. Jensen

OH

Maureen O'Connor

OK

Noma Gurich2

OR

Martha Lee Walters

PA

Thomas G. Saylor

RI

Paul Suttell

SC

Donald W. Beatty

SD

David Gilbertson

TN

Jeffrey S. Bivins

TX

Nathan Hecht3

UT

Matthew B. Durrant

VT

Paul Reiber

VA

Donald W. Lemons

WA

Debra L. Stephens

WV

Tim Armstead

WI

Pat Roggensack

WY

Michael K. Davis

DC

Anna Blackburne-Rigsby

Territories:

AS

Michael Kruse

GU

Philip Carbullido

MP

Alexandro Castro

PR

Maite Oronoz Rodríguez

VI

Rhys Hodge

Italics indicate appointed supreme courts

1. Chief Justice elected biennially by the court from among its members

2. Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals, Presiding Judge David Lewis

3. Texas Court of Criminal Appeals, Presiding Judge Sharon Keller
