"Distinction between rights entailing or not entailing obligations

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Claim rights and liberty rights" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (January 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Rights

Theoretical distinctions

Claim rights and liberty rights

Individual and group rights

Natural rights and legal rights

Negative and positive rights

Human rights

Civil and political

Economic, social and cultural

Three generations

Rights by beneficiary

Accused

Animals

Children

Consumers

Creditors

Deaf

Disabled persons

Elders

Farmers

Humans

Natives

Intersex

Kings

LGBT

Minorities

Parents (Mothers, Fathers)

Patients

Peasants

Plants

Prisoners

States

Students

Victims

Women

Workers

Youth

Other groups of rights

Civil liberties

Digital

Free migration

Linguistic

Property

Reproductive

Self defense

Self-determination of people

Water and sanitation

v

t

e

Some philosophers and political scientists make a distinction between claim rights and liberty rights. A claim right is a right which entails responsibilities, duties, or obligations on other parties regarding the right-holder. In contrast, a liberty right is a right which does not entail obligations on other parties, but rather only freedom or permission for the right-holder. The distinction between these two senses of "rights" originates in American jurist Wesley Newcomb Hohfeld's analysis thereof in his seminal work Fundamental Legal Conceptions, As Applied in Judicial Reasoning and Other Legal Essays.

Liberty rights and claim rights are the inverse of one another: a person has a liberty right permitting him to do something only if there is no other person who has a claim right forbidding him from doing so; and likewise, if a person has a claim right against someone else, that other person's liberty is thus limited. This is because the deontic concepts of obligation and permission are De Morgan dual; a person is permitted to do all and only the things he is not obliged to refrain from, and obliged to do all and only the things he is not permitted to refrain from.

Contents

1 Overview

2 Second-order rights

3 See also

4 References

5 External links

Overview

A person's liberty right to x consists in his freedom to do or have x, while a person's claim right to x consists in an obligation on others to allow or enable him to do or have x. For example, to assert a liberty right to free speech is to assert that you have permission to speak freely; that is, that you are not doing anything wrong by speaking freely. But that liberty right does not in itself entail that others are obligated to help you communicate the things you wish to say, or even that they would be wrong in preventing you from speaking freely. To say these things would be to assert a claim right to free speech; to assert that others are obliged to refrain (i.e. prohibited) from preventing you from speaking freely (that is, that it would be wrong for them to do so) or even perhaps obliged to aid your efforts at communication (that is, it would be wrong for them to refuse such aid). Conversely, such claim rights do not entail liberty rights; e.g. laws prohibiting vigilante justice (establishing a legal claim right to be free thereof) do not thereby condone or permit all the acts which such violent enforcement might otherwise have prevented.

To illustrate, a world with only liberty rights, without any claim rights, would by definition be a world wherein everything was permitted and no act or omission was prohibited; a world wherein none could rightly claim that they had been wronged or neglected. Conversely, a world with only claim rights and no liberty rights would be a world wherein nothing was merely permitted, but all acts were either obligatory or prohibited. The assertion that people have a claim right to liberty – i.e. that people are obliged only to refrain from preventing each other from doing things which are permissible, their liberty rights limited only by the obligation to respect others' liberty – is the central thesis of liberal theories of justice.

Second-order rights

Hohfeld's original analysis included two other types of right: besides claims (or rights proper) and liberties (or privileges), he wrote of powers, and immunities. The other two terms of Hohfeld's analysis, powers and immunities, refer to second-order liberties and claims, respectively. Powers are liberty rights regarding the modification of first-order rights, e.g. the U.S. Congress has certain powers to modify some of U.S. citizens' legal rights, inasmuch as it can impose or remove legal duties. Immunities, conversely, are claim rights regarding the modification of first-order rights, e.g. U.S. citizens have, per their Constitution, certain immunities limiting the positive powers of the U.S. Congress to modify their legal rights. As such, immunities and powers are often subsumed within claims and liberties by later authors, or grouped together into "active rights" (liberties and powers) and "passive rights" (claims and immunities).

These different types of rights can be used as building blocks to explain relatively complex matters such as a particular piece of property. For example, a right to use one's computer can be thought of as a liberty right, but one has a power right to let somebody else use your computer (granting them a liberty right), as well as a claim right against others using the computer; and further, you may have immunity rights protecting your claims and liberties regarding the computer.

See also

Constitutionalism

Constitutional economics

Freedom versus license

Negative and positive rights

Rule according to higher law

Wesley Newcomb Hohfeld

References

^ "THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN A RIGHT AND A LIBERTY by Prof. William E. May". www.christendom-awake.org. Archived from the original on 2019-01-28. Retrieved 2018-06-12.

^ "Hohfeld's Analysis of Rights: An Essential Approach to a Conceptual & Practical Understanding of the Nature of Rights -  MurUEJL 9". classic.austlii.edu.au. Retrieved 2018-06-12.

^ Tappolet, Christine (2013-02-01). "Evaluative vs. Deontic Concepts". The International Encyclopedia of Ethics, 9 Volume Set. International Encyclopedia of Ethics. Blackwell Publishing Ltd. doi:10.1002/9781444367072.wbiee118. ISBN 9781405186414.

^ "Free Speech". American Civil Liberties Union. Retrieved 2018-06-12.

^ "Free Speech". Human Rights Watch. Retrieved 2018-06-12.

^ "Additional Amendments - Bill of Rights Institute". Bill of Rights Institute. Retrieved 2018-06-12.

^ Freedman, R. (2014-02-01). "UN Immunity or Impunity? A Human Rights Based Challenge". European Journal of International Law. 25 (1): 239–254. doi:10.1093/ejil/cht082. ISSN 0938-5428.

External links

The Form of Rights: The Hohfeldian Analytical System, Rights section 2.1, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Claim Rights & Liberty Rights, Human Rights section 3b, Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

The Difference Between a Right and Liberty, Professor William E. May

How to do Things With Hohfeld, 78 Contemporary Legal Problems 185 (2015), Pierre Schlag

v

t

e

Rights theory

Natural and legal rights

Claim rights and liberty rights

Negative and positive rights

Individual and group rights

Natural law

Positive law

Sovereign states

Universal jurisdiction

Equality before the law

Social contract

v

t

e

Human rights

Humans'

Children's

Intersex

Women's

Fundamental concepts

and philosophies

Natural law

Positive law

Sovereignty

Universal jurisdiction

Distinctions 
Claim rights and liberty rights

Individual and group rights

Natural and legal rights

Negative and positive rights

Aspects 
Corporal punishment

Organizations 
List of human rights organisations

National human rights institutions

By continent

Africa

Asia

Europe

North America

Oceania

South America

Related 
History of human rights

List of human rights articles by country

List of human rights awards

Universal Declaration of Human Rights

United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights
