"Area where land meets the sea or ocean

For other uses, see Coast (disambiguation).

See also: Beach, Intertidal zone, Littoral zone, and Shore

Rugged coastline of the West Coast Region of New Zealand

Southeast coast of Greenland

The coast, also known as the coastline or seashore, is defined as the area where land meets the sea or ocean, or as a line that forms the boundary between the land and the ocean or a lake. Around 620,000 kilometres (390,000 mi) of coastline are on Earth. Because of the coastline paradox, a coastline's exact perimeter cannot be determined. 

The term coastal zone is used to refer to a region where interactions of sea and land processes occur. Both the terms coast and coastal are often used to describe a geographic location or region located on a coastline (e.g., New Zealand's West Coast, or the East and West Coasts of the United States).

The term pelagic coast refers to a coast that fronts on the open ocean, as opposed to a more sheltered coast in a gulf or bay. A shore, on the other hand, can refer to parts of land adjoining any large body of water, including oceans (seashore) and lakes (lake shore). Similarly, the somewhat related term stream bed or stream bank refers to the land alongside or sloping down to a river (riverbank) or body of water smaller than a lake. Bank is also used in some parts of the world to refer to an artificial ridge of earth intended to retain the water of a river or pond; in other places this may be called a levee.

While there is general agreement in the scientific community regarding the definition of a coast, in the political sphere, the delineation of the extents of a coast differ according to jurisdiction. Government authorities in various countries may define coast differently for economic and social policy reasons. According to the UN atlas, 44% of all people live within 150 km (93 mi) of the sea.

Contents

1 Formation

2 Environmental importance

3 Human impacts

3.1 Human uses of coasts

3.2 Threats to a coast

3.3 Conservation

4 Types

4.1 Emergent coastline

4.2 Concordant coastline

4.3 Other coastal categories

5 Landforms

5.1 Cliff erosion

5.2 Coastal features formed by sediment

5.3 Coastal features formed by another feature

5.4 Other features on the coast

6 Geologic processes

7 Wildlife

7.1 Animals

7.2 Plants

8 Statistics

8.1 Coastline paradox

8.2 Measuring a coastline

9 See also

10 Notes

11 References

12 External links

Formation 

Atlantic rocky coastline, showing a surf area. Porto Covo, west coast of Portugal

Tides often determine the range over which sediment is deposited or eroded. Areas with high tidal ranges allow waves to reach farther up the shore, and areas with lower tidal ranges produce deposition at a smaller elevation interval. The tidal range is influenced by the size and shape of the coastline. Tides do not typically cause erosion by themselves; however, tidal bores can erode as the waves surge up river estuaries from the ocean.

Waves erode coastline as they break on shore releasing their energy; the larger the wave the more energy it releases and the more sediment it moves. Coastlines with longer shores have more room for the waves to disperse their energy, while coasts with cliffs and short shore faces give little room for the wave energy to be dispersed. In these areas the wave energy breaking against the cliffs is higher, and air and water are compressed into cracks in the rock, forcing the rock apart, breaking it down. Sediment deposited by waves comes from eroded cliff faces and is moved along the coastline by the waves. This forms an abrasion or cliffed coast.

Sediment deposited by rivers is the dominant influence on the amount of sediment located on a coastline. Today riverine deposition at the coast is often blocked by dams and other human regulatory devices, which remove the sediment from the stream by causing it to be deposited inland.

Like the ocean which shapes them, coasts are a dynamic environment with constant change. The Earth's natural processes, particularly sea level rises, waves and various weather phenomena, have resulted in the erosion, accretion and reshaping of coasts as well as flooding and creation of continental shelves and drowned river valleys (rias).

Environmental importance

Somalia has the longest coastline in Africa.

Coasts and their adjacent areas on and off shore are an important part of a local ecosystem. The mixture of fresh water and salt water (brackish water) in estuaries provides many nutrients for marine life. Salt marshes and beaches also support a diversity of plants, animals and insects crucial to the food chain.

The high level of biodiversity creates a high level of biological activity, which has attracted human activity for thousands of years.

Coasts also create essential material for organisms to live by, including estuaries, wetland, seagrass, coral reefs, and mangroves. They support 85 percent of U.S. migratory birds. Coasts also provide a habitat for sea turtles, marine mammals, and coral reefs.

Human impacts

Human uses of coasts

The Coastal Hazard Wheel system published by UNEP for global coastal management

More and more of the world's people live in coastal regions. Many major cities are on or near good harbors and have port facilities. Some landlocked places have achieved port status by building canals.

Nations defend their coasts against military invaders, smugglers and illegal migrants. Fixed coastal defenses have long been erected in many nations, and coastal countries typically have a navy and some form of coast guard.

Coasts, especially those with beaches and warm water, attract tourists. In many island nations such as those of the Mediterranean, South Pacific and Caribbean, tourism is central to the economy. Coasts offer recreational activities such as swimming, fishing, surfing, boating, and sunbathing. Growth management can be a challenge for coastal local authorities who often struggle to provide the infrastructure required by new residents.

\t\t
\t\t\t

\t\t\t
Houses close to the coast, like these in Tiburon, California, may be especially desirable properties.

\t\t\t

\t\t

\t\t
\t\t\t

\t\t\t
View of sea coast from top of a hill at Visakhapatnam in India

\t\t\t

\t\t

Threats to a coast

Further information: Marine pollution and Marine debris

Coasts also face many human-induced environmental impacts. The human influence on climate change is thought to contribute to an accelerated trend in sea level rise which threatens coastal habitats.

Pollution can occur from a number of sources: garbage and industrial debris; the transportation of petroleum in tankers, increasing the probability of large oil spills; small oil spills created by large and small vessels, which flush bilge water into the ocean.

Fishing has declined due to habitat degradation, overfishing, trawling, bycatch and climate change. Since the growth of global fishing enterprises after the 1950s, intensive fishing has spread from a few concentrated areas to encompass nearly all fisheries. The scraping of the ocean floor in bottom dragging is devastating to coral, sponges and other long-lived species that do not recover quickly. This destruction alters the functioning of the ecosystem and can permanently alter species' composition and biodiversity. Bycatch, the capture of unintended species in the course of fishing, is typically returned to the ocean only to die from injuries or exposure. Bycatch represents about a quarter of all marine catch. In the case of shrimp capture, the bycatch is five times larger than the shrimp caught.

It is believed that melting Arctic ice will cause sea levels to rise and flood coastal areas.

\t\t
\t\t\t

\t\t\t
A settled coastline in Marblehead, Massachusetts. Once a fishing port, the harbor is now dedicated to tourism and pleasure boating. Observe that the sand and rocks have been darkened by oil slick up to the high-water line.

\t\t\t

\t\t

\t\t
\t\t\t

\t\t\t
This stretch of coast in Tanzania's capital Dar es Salaam serves as a public waste dump.

\t\t\t

\t\t

\t\t
\t\t\t

\t\t\t
Dead zones occur when phosphorus and nitrogen from fertilizers cause excessive growth of microorganisms, which depletes oxygen and kills fauna.

\t\t\t

\t\t

Conservation

Extraordinary population growth in the 21st century has placed stress on the planet's ecosystems. For example, on Saint Lucia, harvesting mangrove for timber and clearing for fishing reduced the mangrove forests, resulting in a loss of habitat and spawning grounds for marine life that was unique to the area. These forests also helped to stabilize the coastline. Conservation efforts since the 1980s have partially restored the ecosystem.

Types

Emergent coastline

Further information: Emergent coastline and Submergent coastline

According to one principle of classification, an emergent coastline is a coastline which has experienced a fall in sea level, because of either a global sea level change, or local uplift. Emergent coastlines are identifiable by the coastal landforms, which are above the high tide mark, such as raised beaches. In contrast, a submergent coastline is one where the sea level has risen, due to a global sea level change, local subsidence, or isostatic rebound. Submergent coastlines are identifiable by their submerged, or "drowned" landforms, such as rias (drowned valleys) and fjords.

Concordant coastline

Further information: Concordant coastline and Discordant coastline

According to a second principle of classification, a concordant coastline is a coastline where bands of different rock types run parallel to the shore. These rock types are usually of varying resistance, so the coastline forms distinctive landforms, such as coves. Discordant coastlines feature distinctive landforms because the rocks are eroded by ocean waves. The less resistant rocks erode faster, creating inlets or bay; the more resistant rocks erode more slowly, remaining as headlands or outcroppings.

Other coastal categories

A cliffed coast or abrasion coast is one where marine action has produced steep declivities known as cliffs.

A flat coast is one where the land gradually descends into the sea.

A graded shoreline is one where wind and water action has produced a flat and straight coastline.

Landforms

The following articles describe some coastal landforms:

Coastal landforms. The feature shown here as a bay would, in certain (mainly southern) parts of Britain, be called a cove. That between the cuspate foreland and the tombolo is a British bay.

Bay

Headland

Cove

Peninsula

Cliff erosion

Much of the sediment deposited along a coast is the result of erosion of a surrounding cliff, or bluff. Sea cliffs retreat landward because of the constant undercutting of slopes by waves. If the slope/cliff being undercut is made of unconsolidated sediment it will erode at a much faster rate then a cliff made of bedrock.

A natural arch is formed when a headland is eroded through by waves.

Sea caves are made when certain rock beds are more susceptible to erosion than the surrounding rock beds because of different areas of weakness. These areas are eroded at a faster pace creating a hole or crevice that, through time, by means of wave action and erosion, becomes a cave.

A stack is formed when a headland is eroded away by wave and wind action.

A stump is a shortened sea stack that has been eroded away or fallen because of instability.

Wave-cut notches are caused by the undercutting of overhanging slopes which leads to increased stress on cliff material and a greater probability that the slope material will fall. The fallen debris accumulates at the bottom of the cliff and is eventually removed by waves.

A wave-cut platform forms after erosion and retreat of a sea cliff has been occurring for a long time. Gently sloping wave-cut platforms develop early on in the first stages of cliff retreat. Later, the length of the platform decreases because the waves lose their energy as they break further off shore.

Coastal features formed by sediment

Beach

Beach cusps

Raised beach

Cuspate foreland

Dune system

Mudflat

Ria

Shoal

Strand plain

Spit

Surge channel

Tombolo

Coastal features formed by another feature

Lagoon

Salt marsh

Other features on the coast

Concordant coastline

Discordant coastline

Fjord

Island

Island arc

Machair

Geologic processes

The following articles describe the various geologic processes that affect a coastal zone:

Attrition

Currents

Denudation

Deposition

Erosion

Flooding

Longshore drift

Saltation

Sea level change
eustatic

isostatic

Sedimentation

Coastal sediment supply
sediment transport

solution

subaerial processes

suspension

Tides

Water waves
diffraction

refraction

wave breaking

wave shoaling

Weathering

Wildlife

See also: Seashore wildlife and Coastal fish

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Animals

Animals that live in coastal areas include puffins, sea turtles and rockhopper penguins, among many others. Sea snails and various kinds of barnacles live on the coast and scavenge on food deposited by the sea. Most coastal animals are used to humans in developed areas, such as dolphins and seagulls who eat food thrown for them by tourists. Since the coastal areas are all part of the littoral zone, there is a profusion of marine life found just off-coast.

There are many kinds of seabirds on the coast. Pelicans and cormorants join up with terns and oystercatchers to forage for fish and shellfish on the coast. There are sea lions on the coast of Wales and other countries.

Plants

Coastal areas are famous for their kelp beds. Kelp is a fast-growing seaweed that grows up to a metre a day. Corals and sea anemones are true animals, but live a lifestyle similar to that of plants. Mangroves, seagrasses and salt marsh are important coastal vegetation types in tropical and temperate environments respectively.

Statistics

Coastline paradox

Main article: Coastline paradox

Shortly before 1951, Lewis Fry Richardson, in researching the possible effect of border lengths on the probability of war, noticed that the Portuguese reported their measured border with Spain to be 987 km, but the Spanish reported it as 1214 km. This was the beginning of the coastline problem, which is a mathematical uncertainty inherent in the measurement of boundaries that are irregular.

The prevailing method of estimating the length of a border (or coastline) was to lay out n equal straight-line segments of length ℓ with dividers on a map or aerial photograph. Each end of the segment must be on the boundary. Investigating the discrepancies in border estimation, Richardson discovered what is now termed the Richardson Effect: the sum of the segments is inversely proportional to the common length of the segments. In effect, the shorter the ruler, the longer the measured border; the Spanish and Portuguese geographers were simply using different-length rulers.

The result most astounding to Richardson is that, under certain circumstances, as ℓ approaches zero, the length of the coastline approaches infinity. Richardson had believed, based on Euclidean geometry, that a coastline would approach a fixed length, as do similar estimations of regular geometric figures. For example, the perimeter of a regular polygon inscribed in a circle approaches the circumference with increasing numbers of sides (and decrease in the length of one side). In geometric measure theory such a smooth curve as the circle that can be approximated by small straight segments with a definite limit is termed a rectifiable curve.

Measuring a coastline

Further information: How Long Is the Coast of Britain? Statistical Self-Similarity and Fractional Dimension

More than a decade after Richardson completed his work, Benoit Mandelbrot developed a new branch of mathematics, fractal geometry, to describe just such non-rectifiable complexes in nature as the infinite coastline. His own definition of the new figure serving as the basis for his study is:

I coined fractal from the Latin adjective fractus. The corresponding Latin verb frangere means "to break:" to create irregular fragments. It is therefore sensible ... that, in addition to "fragmented" ... fractus should also mean "irregular."

A key property of the fractal is self-similarity; that is, at any scale the same general configuration appears. A coastline is perceived as bays alternating with promontories. In the hypothetical situation that a given coastline has this property of self-similarity, then no matter how greatly any one small section of coastline is magnified, a similar pattern of smaller bays and promontories superimposed on larger bays and promontories appears, right down to the grains of sand. At that scale the coastline appears as a momentarily shifting, potentially infinitely long thread with a stochastic arrangement of bays and promontories formed from the small objects at hand. In such an environment (as opposed to smooth curves) Mandelbrot asserts "coastline length turns out to be an elusive notion that slips between the fingers of those who want to grasp it."

There are different kinds of fractals. A coastline with the stated property is in "a first category of fractals, namely curves whose fractal dimension is greater than 1." That last statement represents an extension by Mandelbrot of Richardson's thought. Mandelbrot's statement of the Richardson Effect is:

where L, coastline length, a function of the measurement unit, ε, is approximated by the expression. F is a constant and D is a parameter that Richardson found depended on the coastline approximated by L. He gave no theoretical explanation but Mandelbrot identified D with a non-integer form of the Hausdorff dimension, later the fractal dimension. Rearranging the right side of the expression obtains:

where Fε−D must be the number of units ε required to obtain L. The fractal dimension is the number of the dimensions of the figure being used to approximate the fractal: 0 for a dot, 1 for a line, 2 for a square. D in the expression is between 1 and 2, for coastlines typically less than 1.5. The broken line measuring the coast does not extend in one direction nor does it represent an area, but is intermediate. It can be interpreted as a thick line or band of width 2ε. More broken coastlines have greater D and therefore L is longer for the same ε. Mandelbrot showed that D is independent of ε.

See also

Geography portal

Ballantine scale

Coastal and Estuarine Research Federation

Coastal biogeomorphology

Coastal development hazards

Coastline of the North Sea

European Atlas of the Seas

How Long Is the Coast of Britain? Statistical Self-Similarity and Fractional Dimension

Land reclamation

List of beaches

List of countries by length of coastline

List of U.S. states by coastline

Marine debris

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Climate and Societal Interactions Program

Nautical chart

Pole of inaccessibility

Seaside resort

Tombolo

Notes

^ "Coast". The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (4th ed.). 2000. Archived from the original on 2009-02-01. Retrieved 2008-12-11.

^ "Coastline definition". Merriam-Webster. Retrieved 2015-06-13.

^ Nelson, Stephen A. (2007). "Coastal Zones". Archived from the original on 2013-03-16. Retrieved 2008-12-11.

^ "UN Atlas". Archived from the original on 2 November 2013. Retrieved 31 October 2013.

^ Davidson, Reed & Davis 2002, p. 421.

^ a b c Easterbrook 1999.

^ "The Indian Ocean Coast of Somalia". Marine Pollution Bulletin. 41 (1-6): 141–159. December 2000. doi: 10.1016/S0025-326X(00)00107-7

^ US EPA, ORD (2017-11-02). "Coastal Waters". US EPA. Retrieved 2020-05-04.

^ Goudarzi, Sara (July 18, 2006). "Flocking to the Coast: World's Population Migrating into Danger". Live Science. Retrieved 2008-12-14.

^ Richardson, Lewis Fry (1993). "Fractals". In Ashford, Oliver M.; Charnock, H.; Drazin, P. G.; et al. (eds.). The Collected Papers of Lewis Fry Richardson: Meteorology and numerical analysis. 1. Cambridge University Press. pp. 45–46. ISBN 0-521-38297-1.

^ a b Mandelbrot 1983, p. 28. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMandelbrot1983 (help)

^ Mandelbrot 1983, p. 1. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMandelbrot1983 (help)

^ Mandelbrot 1983, pp. 29–31. sfn error: no target: CITEREFMandelbrot1983 (help)

References

Burke, Lauretta A.; Kura, Yumiko; Kassem, Ken; Revenga, Carmen; Spalding, Mark; McAllister, Don (2001). "Coastal Ecosystems" (PDF). In Hutter, Carolynne (ed.). Pilot Analysis of Global Ecosystems. World Resources Institute. ISBN 978-1-56973-458-2. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2003-04-08.

Davidson, Jon P.; Reed, Walter E.; Davis, Paul M. (2002). Exploring Earth: An Introduction to Physical Geology. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall Inc. ISBN 978-0-13-018372-9.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Easterbrook, Don J. (1999). Surface Processes and Landforms (2 ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall Inc. ISBN 978-0-13-860958-0.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Haslett, Simon K. (2009). Coastal Systems. introduction to environment (2nd ed.). New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-44060-8.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Mandelbrot, Benoit B. (1982). "II.5 How long is the coast of Britain?". The Fractal Geometry of Nature. Macmillan. pp. 25–33. ISBN 978-0-7167-1186-5.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

f u

External links

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Coasts.

 Wikiquote has quotations related to: Coast

 Look up coast in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

 Wikiversity has learning resources about Coast

"Wild Coast USA". Sierra Club. Archived from the original on 2008-05-09. Retrieved 2008-12-11.

"Data Explorer". NOAA's National Ocean Service. Archived from the original on 2008-12-21. Retrieved 2008-12-11.

Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Coast" . Encyclopædia Britannica. 6 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 599.

v

t

e

Coastal geography

Landforms 
Anchialine pool

Archipelago

Atoll

Avulsion

Ayre

Barrier island

Bay

Baymouth bar

Bight

Bodden

Brackish marsh

Cape

Channel

Cliff

Coast

Coastal plain

Coastal waterfall

Continental margin

Continental shelf

Coral reef

Cove

Dune
cliff-top

Estuary

Firth

Fjard

Fjord

Förde

Freshwater marsh

Fundus

Gat

Geo

Gulf

Gut

Hapua

Headland

Inlet

Intertidal wetland

Island

Islet

Isthmus

Lagoon

Machair

Marine terrace

Mega delta

Mouth bar

Mudflat

Natural arch

Peninsula

Reef

Regressive delta

Ria

River delta

Salt marsh

Shoal

Shore

Skerry

Sound

Spit

Stack

Strait

Strand plain

Submarine canyon

Tidal island

Tidal marsh

Tide pool

Tied island

Tombolo

Windwatt

Beaches 
Beach cusps

Beach evolution

Coastal morphodynamics

Beach ridge

Beachrock

Pocket beach

Raised beach

Recession

Shell beach

Shingle beach

Storm beach

Wash margin

Processes 
Blowhole

Cliffed coast

Coastal biogeomorphology

Coastal erosion

Concordant coastline

Current

Cuspate foreland

Discordant coastline

Emergent coastline

Feeder bluff

Fetch

Flat coast

Graded shoreline

Ingression coast

Large-scale coastal behaviour

Longshore drift

Marine regression

Marine transgression

Raised shoreline

Rip current

Rocky shore

Sea cave

Sea foam

Shoal

Steep coast

Submergent coastline

Surf break

Surf zone

Surge channel

Swash

Undertow

Volcanic arc

Wave-cut platform

Wave shoaling

Wind wave

Wrack zone

Management 
Accretion

Coastal management

Integrated coastal zone management

Submersion

Related 
Bulkhead line

Grain size
boulder

clay

cobble

granule

pebble

sand

shingle

silt

Intertidal zone

Littoral zone

Physical oceanography

Region of freshwater influence

 Category

 Commons

Authority control 
GND: 4033469-7

LCCN: sh85027443

NARA: 10638030

NDL: 00564542
