"For other uses, see Dada (disambiguation).

Avant-garde art movement in the early 20th century

Grand opening of the first Dada exhibition: International Dada Fair, Berlin, 5 June 1920. The central figure hanging from the ceiling was an effigy of a German officer with a pig's head. From left to right: Raoul Hausmann, Hannah Höch (sitting), Otto Burchard, Johannes Baader, Wieland Herzfelde, Margarete Herzfelde, Dr. Oz (Otto Schmalhausen), George Grosz and John Heartfield.

Francis Picabia: left, Le saint des saints c'est de moi qu'il s'agit dans ce portrait, 1 July 1915; center, Portrait d'une jeune fille americaine dans l'état de nudité, 5 July 1915; right, J'ai vu et c'est de toi qu'il s'agit, De Zayas! De Zayas! Je suis venu sur les rivages du Pont-Euxin, New York, 1915

Dada artists, group photograph, 1920, Paris. From left to right, Back row: Louis Aragon, Theodore Fraenkel, Paul Eluard, Clément Pansaers, Emmanuel Fay (cut off).

Second row: Paul Dermée, Philippe Soupault, Georges Ribemont-Dessaignes.

Front row: Tristan Tzara (with monocle), Celine Arnauld, Francis Picabia, André Breton.

Dada (/ˈdɑːdɑː/) or Dadaism was an art movement of the European avant-garde in the early 20th century, with early centers in Zürich, Switzerland, at the Cabaret Voltaire (circa 1916); New York Dada began circa 1915, and after 1920 Dada flourished in Paris. Developed in reaction to World War I, the Dada movement consisted of artists who rejected the logic, reason, and aestheticism of modern capitalist society, instead expressing nonsense, irrationality, and anti-bourgeois protest in their works. The art of the movement spanned visual, literary, and sound media, including collage, sound poetry, cut-up writing, and sculpture. Dadaist artists expressed their discontent toward violence, war, and nationalism, and maintained political affinities with the radical far-left.

Cover of the first edition of the publication Dada, Tristan Tzara; Zürich, 1917.

There is no consensus on the origin of the movement's name; a common story is that the German artist Richard Huelsenbeck slid a paper knife (letter-opener) at random into a dictionary, where it landed on "dada", a colloquial French term for a hobby horse. Jean Arp wrote that Tristan Tzara invented the word at 6 pm on 6 February 1916, in the Café de la Terrasse in Zurich. Others note that it suggests the first words of a child, evoking a childishness and absurdity that appealed to the group. Still others speculate that the word might have been chosen to evoke a similar meaning (or no meaning at all) in any language, reflecting the movement's internationalism.

The roots of Dada lie in pre-war avant-garde. The term anti-art, a precursor to Dada, was coined by Marcel Duchamp around 1913 to characterize works that challenge accepted definitions of art. Cubism and the development of collage and abstract art would inform the movement's detachment from the constraints of reality and convention. The work of French poets, Italian Futurists and the German Expressionists would influence Dada's rejection of the tight correlation between words and meaning. Works such as Ubu Roi (1896) by Alfred Jarry, and the ballet Parade (1916–17) by Erik Satie would also be characterized as proto-Dadaist works. The Dada movement's principles were first collected in Hugo Ball's Dada Manifesto in 1916.

The Dadaist movement included public gatherings, demonstrations, and publication of art/literary journals; passionate coverage of art, politics, and culture were topics often discussed in a variety of media. Key figures in the movement included Jean Arp, Johannes Baader, Hugo Ball, Marcel Duchamp, Max Ernst, Elsa von Freytag-Loringhoven, George Grosz, Raoul Hausmann, John Heartfield, Emmy Hennings, Hannah Höch, Richard Huelsenbeck, Francis Picabia, Man Ray, Hans Richter, Kurt Schwitters, Sophie Taeuber-Arp, Tristan Tzara, and Beatrice Wood, among others. The movement influenced later styles like the avant-garde and downtown music movements, and groups including Surrealism, nouveau réalisme, pop art and Fluxus.

Contents

1 Overview

2 History

2.1 Zürich

2.2 Berlin

2.3 Cologne

2.4 New York

2.5 Paris

2.6 Netherlands

2.7 Georgia

2.8 Yugoslavia

2.9 Italy

2.10 Japan

2.11 Russia

3 Poetry

4 Music

5 Legacy

6 Art techniques developed

6.1 Collage

6.2 Cut-up technique

6.3 Photomontage

6.4 Assemblage

6.5 Readymades

7 Artists

8 See also

9 References

10 Bibliography

11 Filmography

12 External links

Overview

Francis Picabia, Dame! Illustration for the cover of the periodical Dadaphone, n. 7, Paris, March 1920

Dada was an informal international movement, with participants in Europe and North America. The beginnings of Dada correspond to the outbreak of World War I. For many participants, the movement was a protest against the bourgeois nationalist and colonialist interests, which many Dadaists believed were the root cause of the war, and against the cultural and intellectual conformity—in art and more broadly in society—that corresponded to the war.

Avant-garde circles outside France knew of pre-war Parisian developments. They had seen (or participated in) Cubist exhibitions held at Galeries Dalmau, Barcelona (1912), Galerie Der Sturm in Berlin (1912), the Armory Show in New York (1913), SVU Mánes in Prague (1914), several Jack of Diamonds exhibitions in Moscow and at De Moderne Kunstkring, Amsterdam (between 1911 and 1915). Futurism developed in response to the work of various artists. Dada subsequently combined these approaches.

Many Dadaists believed that the 'reason' and 'logic' of bourgeois capitalist society had led people into war. They expressed their rejection of that ideology in artistic expression that appeared to reject logic and embrace chaos and irrationality. For example, George Grosz later recalled that his Dadaist art was intended as a protest "against this world of mutual destruction."

According to Hans Richter Dada was not art: it was "anti-art." Dada represented the opposite of everything which art stood for. Where art was concerned with traditional aesthetics, Dada ignored aesthetics. If art was to appeal to sensibilities, Dada was intended to offend.

As Hugo Ball expressed it, "For us, art is not an end in itself ... but it is an opportunity for the true perception and criticism of the times we live in."

A reviewer from the American Art News stated at the time that "Dada philosophy is the sickest, most paralyzing and most destructive thing that has ever originated from the brain of man." Art historians have described Dada as being, in large part, a "reaction to what many of these artists saw as nothing more than an insane spectacle of collective homicide."

Years later, Dada artists described the movement as "a phenomenon bursting forth in the midst of the postwar economic and moral crisis, a savior, a monster, which would lay waste to everything in its path...  a systematic work of destruction and demoralization... In the end it became nothing but an act of sacrilege."

To quote Dona Budd's The Language of Art Knowledge,

Dada was born out of negative reaction to the horrors of the First World War. This international movement was begun by a group of artists and poets associated with the Cabaret Voltaire in Zürich. Dada rejected reason and logic, prizing nonsense, irrationality and intuition. The origin of the name Dada is unclear; some believe that it is a nonsensical word. Others maintain that it originates from the Romanian artists Tristan Tzara's and Marcel Janco's frequent use of the words "da, da," meaning "yes, yes" in the Romanian language. Another theory says that the name "Dada" came during a meeting of the group when a paper knife stuck into a French–German dictionary happened to point to 'dada', a French word for 'hobbyhorse'.

The movement primarily involved visual arts, literature, poetry, art manifestos, art theory, theatre, and graphic design, and concentrated its anti-war politics through a rejection of the prevailing standards in art through anti-art cultural works.

The creations of Duchamp, Picabia, Man Ray, and others between 1915 and 1917 eluded the term Dada at the time, and "New York Dada" came to be seen as a post facto invention of Duchamp. At the outset of the 1920s the term Dada flourished in Europe with the help of Duchamp and Picabia, who had both returned from New York. Notwithstanding, Dadaists such as Tzara and Richter claimed European precedence. Art historian David Hopkins notes:

Ironically, though, Duchamp's late activities in New York, along with the machinations of Picabia, re-cast Dada's history. Dada's European chroniclers—primarily Richter, Tzara, and Huelsenbeck—would eventually become preoccupied with establishing the pre-eminence of Zurich and Berlin at the foundations of Dada, but it proved to be Duchamp who was most strategically brilliant in manipulating the genealogy of this avant-garde formation, deftly turning New York Dada from a late-comer into an originating force.

History

Dada emerged from a period of artistic and literary movements like Futurism, Cubism and Expressionism; centered mainly in Italy, France and Germany respectively, in those years. However, unlike the earlier movements Dada was able to establish a broad base of support, giving rise to a movement that was international in scope. Its adherents were based in cities all over the world including New York, Zürich, Berlin, Paris and others. There were regional differences like an emphasis on literature in Zürich and political protest in Berlin.

Prominent Dadaists published manifestos, but the movement was loosely organized and there was no central hierarchy. On 14 July 1916, Ball recited the manifesto; In 1917, Tzara wrote a second Dada manifesto, considered one of the most important Dada writings, which was published in 1918. 

Tristan Tzara's manifesto articulated the concept of "Dadaist disgust"—the contradiction implicit in avant-garde works between the criticism and affirmation of modernist reality. In the Dadaist perspective modern art and culture are considered a type of fetishization where the objects of consumption (including organized systems of thought like philosophy and morality) are chosen, much like a preference for cake or cherries, to fill a void.

The shock and scandal the movement inflamed was deliberate; Dadist magazines were banned and their exhibits closed. Some of the artists even faced imprisonment. These provocations were part of the entertainment but, over time, audiences' expectations eventually outpaced the movement's capacity to deliver. As the artists' well-known "sarcastic laugh" started to come from the audience, the provocations of Dadaists began to lose their impact. Dada was an active movement during years of political turmoil from 1916 when European countries were actively engaged in World War I, the conclusion of which, in 1918, set the stage for a new political order.

Zürich

Hannah Höch, Cut with the Kitchen Knife through the Last Epoch of Weimar Beer-Belly Culture in Germany, 1919, collage of pasted papers, 90×144 cm, Nationalgalerie, Staatliche Museen zu Berlin

There is some disagreement about where Dada originated. The movement is commonly identified with the Cabaret Voltaire (housed inside the Holländische Meierei bar in Zurich) co-founded by poet and cabaret singer Emmy Hennings and Hugo Ball. Some sources propose a Romanian origin, arguing that Dada was an offshoot of a vibrant artistic tradition that transposed to Switzerland when a group of Jewish modernist artists, including Tristan Tzara, Marcel Janco, and Arthur Segal settled in Zürich. Before World War I, similar art had already existed in Bucharest and other Eastern European cities; it is likely that Dada's catalyst was the arrival in Zürich of artists like Tzara and Janco.

The name Cabaret Voltaire was a reference to the French philosopher Voltaire, whose novel Candide mocked the religious and philosophical dogmas of the day. Opening night was attended by Ball, Tzara, Jean Arp, and Janco. These artists along with others like Sophie Taeuber, Richard Huelsenbeck and Hans Richter started putting on performances at the Cabaret Voltaire and using art to express their disgust with the war and the interests that inspired it. Having left Germany and Romania during World War I, the artists arrived in politically neutral Switzerland. They used abstraction to fight against the social, political, and cultural ideas of that time. They used techniques of shock, provocation and "vaudevilleian excess" were all tools to subvert the conventions they believed had caused the Great War. The Dadaists believed those ideas to be a byproduct of bourgeois society that was so apathetic it would wage war against itself rather than challenge the status quo:

We had lost confidence in our culture. Everything had to be demolished. We would begin again after the tabula rasa. At the Cabaret Voltaire we began by shocking common sense, public opinion, education, institutions, museums, good taste, in short, the whole prevailing order."

— Marcel Janco

Ball said that Janco's mask and costume designs, inspired by Romanian folk art, made "the horror of our time, the paralyzing background of events" visible. According to Ball, performances were accompanied by a "balalaika orchestra playing delightful folk-songs." Influenced by African music, arrhythmic drumming and jazz were common at Dada gatherings.

After the cabaret closed down, Dada activities moved on to a new gallery, and Hugo Ball left for Bern. Tzara began a relentless campaign to spread Dada ideas. He bombarded French and Italian artists and writers with letters, and soon emerged as the Dada leader and master strategist. The Cabaret Voltaire re-opened, and is still in the same place at the Spiegelgasse 1 in the Niederdorf.

Zürich Dada, with Tzara at the helm, published the art and literature review Dada beginning in July 1917, with five editions from Zürich and the final two from Paris.

Other artists, such as André Breton and Philippe Soupault, created "literature groups to help extend the influence of Dada".

After the fighting of the First World War had ended in the armistice of November 1918, most of the Zürich Dadaists returned to their home countries, and some began Dada activities in other cities. Others, such as the Swiss native Sophie Taeuber, would remain in Zürich into the 1920s.

Berlin

Cover of Anna Blume, Dichtungen, 1919

"Berlin was a city of tightened stomachers, of mounting, thundering hunger, where hidden rage was transformed into a boundless money lust, and men's minds were concentrating more and more on questions of naked existence... Fear was in everybody's bones" – Richard Hülsenbeck

Raoul Hausmann, who helped establish Dada in Berlin, published his manifesto Synthethic Cino of Painting in 1918 where he attacked Expressionism and the art critics who promoted it. Dada is envisioned in contrast to art forms, such as Expressionism, that appeal to viewers' emotional states: "the exploitation of so-called echoes of the soul". In Hausmann's conception of Dada, new techniques of creating art would open doors to explore new artistic impulses. Fragmented use of real world stimuli allowed an expression of reality that was radically different from other forms of art:

A child's discarded doll or a brightly colored rag are more necessary expressions than those of some ass who seeks to immortalize himself in oils in finite parlors.

— Raoul Hausmann

The groups in Germany were not as strongly anti-art as other groups. Their activity and art were more political and social, with corrosive manifestos and propaganda, satire, public demonstrations and overt political activities. The intensely political and war-torn environment of Berlin had a dramatic impact on the ideas of Berlin Dadaists. Conversely, New York's geographic distance from the war spawned its more theoretically-driven, less political nature. According to Hans Richter, a Dadaist who was in Berlin yet “aloof from active participation in Berlin Dada”, several distinguishing characteristics of the Dada movement there included: “its political element and its technical discoveries in painting and literature”; “inexhaustible energy”; “mental freedom which included the abolition of everything”; and “members intoxicated with their own power in a way that had no relation to the real world”, who would “turn their rebelliousness even against each other”.

In February 1918, while the Great War was approaching its climax, Huelsenbeck gave his first Dada speech in Berlin, and he produced a Dada manifesto later in the year. Following the October Revolution in Russia, by then out of the war, Hannah Höch and George Grosz used Dada to express communist sympathies. Grosz, together with John Heartfield, Höch and Hausmann developed the technique of photomontage during this period. Johannes Baader, the uninhibited Oberdada, was the “crowbar” of the Berlin movement's direct action according to Hans Richter and is credited with creating the first giant collages, according to Raoul Hausmann.

After the war, the artists published a series of short-lived political magazines and held the First International Dada Fair, 'the greatest project yet conceived by the Berlin Dadaists', in the summer of 1920. As well as work by the main members of Berlin Dada – Grosz, Raoul Hausmann, Hannah Höch, Johannes Baader, Huelsenbeck and Heartfield – the exhibition also included the work of Otto Dix, Francis Picabia, Jean Arp, Max Ernst, Rudolf Schlichter, Johannes Baargeld and others. In all, over 200 works were exhibited, surrounded by incendiary slogans, some of which also ended up written on the walls of the Nazi's Entartete Kunst exhibition in 1937. Despite high ticket prices, the exhibition lost money, with only one recorded sale.

The Berlin group published periodicals such as Club Dada, Der Dada, Everyman His Own Football, and Dada Almanach. They also established a political party, the Central Council of Dada for the World Revolution.

Cologne

In Cologne, Ernst, Baargeld, and Arp launched a controversial Dada exhibition in 1920 which focused on nonsense and anti-bourgeois sentiments. Cologne's Early Spring Exhibition was set up in a pub, and required that participants walk past urinals while being read lewd poetry by a woman in a communion dress. The police closed the exhibition on grounds of obscenity, but it was re-opened when the charges were dropped.

New York

Rrose Sélavy, the alter ego of Dadaist Marcel Duchamp

Marcel Duchamp, Fountain, 1917; photograph by Alfred Stieglitz

Main article: New York Dada

Like Zürich, New York City was a refuge for writers and artists from the First World War. Soon after arriving from France in 1915, Marcel Duchamp and Francis Picabia met American artist Man Ray. By 1916 the three of them became the center of radical anti-art activities in the United States. American Beatrice Wood, who had been studying in France, soon joined them, along with Elsa von Freytag-Loringhoven. Arthur Cravan, fleeing conscription in France, was also in New York for a time. Much of their activity centered in Alfred Stieglitz's gallery, 291, and the home of Walter and Louise Arensberg.

The New Yorkers, though not particularly organized, called their activities Dada, but they did not issue manifestos. They issued challenges to art and culture through publications such as The Blind Man, Rongwrong, and New York Dada in which they criticized the traditionalist basis for museum art. New York Dada lacked the disillusionment of European Dada and was instead driven by a sense of irony and humor. In his book Adventures in the arts: informal chapters on painters, vaudeville and poets Marsden Hartley included an essay on "The Importance of Being 'Dada'".

During this time Duchamp began exhibiting "readymades" (everyday objects found or purchased and declared art) such as a bottle rack, and was active in the Society of Independent Artists. In 1917 he submitted the now famous Fountain, a urinal signed R. Mutt, to the Society of Independent Artists exhibition but they rejected the piece. First an object of scorn within the arts community, the Fountain has since become almost canonized by some as one of the most recognizable modernist works of sculpture. Art world experts polled by the sponsors of the 2004 Turner Prize, Gordon's gin, voted it "the most influential work of modern art". As recent scholarship documents, the work is still controversial. Duchamp indicated in a 1917 letter to his sister that a female friend was centrally involved in the conception of this work: "One of my female friends who had adopted the pseudonym Richard Mutt sent me a porcelain urinal as a sculpture." The piece is in line with the scatological aesthetics of Duchamp's neighbour, the Baroness Elsa von Freytag-Loringhoven. In an attempt to "pay homage to the spirit of Dada" a performance artist named Pierre Pinoncelli made a crack in a replica of The Fountain with a hammer in January 2006; he also urinated on it in 1993.

Picabia's travels tied New York, Zürich and Paris groups together during the Dadaist period. For seven years he also published the Dada periodical 391 in Barcelona, New York City, Zürich, and Paris from 1917 through 1924.

By 1921, most of the original players moved to Paris where Dada had experienced its last major incarnation.

Paris

Man Ray, c. 1921–22, Rencontre dans la porte tournante, published on the cover of Der Sturm, Volume 13, Number 3, 5 March 1922

Man Ray, c. 1921–22, Dessin (Drawing), published on page 43 of Der Sturm, Volume 13, Number 3, 5 March 1922

The French avant-garde kept abreast of Dada activities in Zürich with regular communications from Tristan Tzara (whose pseudonym means "sad in country," a name chosen to protest the treatment of Jews in his native Romania), who exchanged letters, poems, and magazines with Guillaume Apollinaire, André Breton, Max Jacob, Clément Pansaers, and other French writers, critics and artists.

Paris had arguably been the classical music capital of the world since the advent of musical Impressionism in the late 19th century. One of its practitioners, Erik Satie, collaborated with Picasso and Cocteau in a mad, scandalous ballet called Parade. First performed by the Ballets Russes in 1917, it succeeded in creating a scandal but in a different way than Stravinsky's Le Sacre du printemps had done almost five years earlier. This was a ballet that was clearly parodying itself, something traditional ballet patrons would obviously have serious issues with.

Dada in Paris surged in 1920 when many of the originators converged there. Inspired by Tzara, Paris Dada soon issued manifestos, organized demonstrations, staged performances and produced a number of journals (the final two editions of Dada, Le Cannibale, and Littérature featured Dada in several editions.)

The first introduction of Dada artwork to the Parisian public was at the Salon des Indépendants in 1921. Jean Crotti exhibited works associated with Dada including a work entitled, Explicatif bearing the word Tabu. In the same year Tzara staged his Dadaist play The Gas Heart to howls of derision from the audience. When it was re-staged in 1923 in a more professional production, the play provoked a theatre riot (initiated by André Breton) that heralded the split within the movement that was to produce Surrealism. Tzara's last attempt at a Dadaist drama was his "ironic tragedy" Handkerchief of Clouds in 1924.

Netherlands

In the Netherlands the Dada movement centered mainly around Theo van Doesburg, best known for establishing the De Stijl movement and magazine of the same name. Van Doesburg mainly focused on poetry, and included poems from many well-known Dada writers in De Stijl such as Hugo Ball, Hans Arp and Kurt Schwitters. Van Doesburg and Thijs Rinsema  (a cordwainer and artist in Drachten) became friends of Schwitters, and together they organized the so-called Dutch Dada campaign in 1923, where van Doesburg promoted a leaflet about Dada (entitled What is Dada?), Schwitters read his poems, Vilmos Huszár demonstrated a mechanical dancing doll and Nelly van Doesburg (Theo's wife), played avant-garde compositions on piano.

A Bonset sound-poem, "Passing troop", 1916

Van Doesburg wrote Dada poetry himself in De Stijl, although under a pseudonym, I.K. Bonset, which was only revealed after his death in 1931. 'Together' with I.K. Bonset, he also published a short-lived Dutch Dada magazine called Mécano (1922–3). Another Dutchman identified by K. Schippers in his study of the movement in the Netherlands was the Groningen typographer H. N. Werkman, who was in touch with van Doesburg and Schwitters while editing his own magazine, The Next Call (1923–6). Two more artists mentioned by Schippers were German-born and eventually settled in the Netherlands. These were Otto van Rees, who had taken part in the liminal exhibitions at the Café Voltaire in Zürich, and Paul Citroen.

Georgia

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Dada" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (March 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Though Dada itself was unknown in Georgia until at least 1920, from 1917 until 1921 a group of poets called themselves "41st Degree" (referring both to the latitude of Tbilisi, Georgia and to the temperature of a high fever) organized along Dadaist lines. The most important figure in this group was Iliazd, whose radical typographical designs visually echo the publications of the Dadaists. After his flight to Paris in 1921, he collaborated with Dadaists on publications and events.

Yugoslavia

In Yugoslavia, alongside the new art movement Zenitism, there was significant Dada activity between 1920 and 1922, run mainly by Dragan Aleksić and including work by Mihailo S. Petrov, Ljubomir Micić and Branko Ve Poljanski. Aleksić used the term "Yougo-Dada" and is known to have been in contact with Raoul Hausmann, Kurt Schwitters, and Tristan Tzara.

Italy

The Dada movement in Italy, based in Mantua, was met with distaste and failed to make a significant impact in the world of art. It published a magazine for a short time and held an exhibition in Rome, featuring paintings, quotations from Tristan Tzara, and original epigrams such as "True Dada is against Dada". The most notable member of this group was Julius Evola, who went on to become an eminent scholar of occultism, as well as a right-wing philosopher.

Japan

Dada, an iconic character from the Ultra Series. His design draws inspiration from the art movement.

A prominent Dada group in Japan was Mavo, founded in July 1923 by Tomoyoshi Murayama and Yanase Masamu . Other prominent artists were Jun Tsuji, Eisuke Yoshiyuki, Shinkichi Takahashi and Katué Kitasono.

In the Tsuburaya Productions's Ultra Series, an alien named Dada was inspired by Dadaism movement, with said character first appearing in episode 28 of the 1966 tokusatsu series, Ultraman, its design by character artist Toru Narita. Dada's design is primarily monochromatic, and features numerous sharp lines and alternating black and white stripes, in reference to the movement and, in particular, to chessboard and Go patterns. On May 19, 2016, in celebration to the 100 year anniversary of Dadaism in Tokyo, the Ultra Monster was invited to meet the Swiss Ambassador Urs Bucher.

Butoh, the Japanese dance-form originating in 1959, can be considered to have direct connections to the spirit of the Dada movement, as Tatsumi Hijikata, one of Butoh's founders, "was influenced early in his career by Dadaism".

Russia

Dada in itself was relatively unknown in Russia, however, avant-garde art was widespread due to the Bolshevik's revolutionary agenda. The Nichevoki , a literary group sharing Dadaist ideals achieved infamy after one of its members suggested that Vladimir Mayakovsky should go to the "Pampushka" (Pameatnik Pushkina – Pushkin monument) on the "Tverbul" (Tverskoy Boulevard) to clean the shoes of anyone who desired it, after Mayakovsky declared that he was going to cleanse Russian literature. For more information on Dadaism's influence upon Russian avant-garde art, see the book Russian Dada 1914–1924.

Poetry

Dadaglobe solicitation form letter signed by Francis Picabia, Tristan Tzara, Georges Ribemont-Dessaignes, and Walter Serner, c. week of November 8, 1920. This example was sent from Paris to Alfred Vagts in Munich.

Dadists used shock, nihilism, negativity, paradox, randomness, subconscious forces and antinomianism to subvert established traditions in the aftermath of the Great War. Tzara's 1920 manifesto proposed cutting words from a newspaper and randomly selecting fragments to write poetry, a process in which the synchronous universe itself becomes an active agent in creating the art. A poem written using this technique would be a "fruit" of the words that were clipped from the article.

In literary arts Dadaists focused on poetry, particularly the so-called sound poetry invented by Hugo Ball. Dadaist poems attacked traditional conceptions of poetry, including structure, order, as well as the interplay of sound and the meaning of language. For Dadaists, the existing system by which information is articulated robs language of its dignity. The dismantling of language and poetic conventions are Dadaist attempts to restore language to its purest and most innocent form: "With these sound poem, we wanted to dispense with a language which journalism had made desolate and impossible."

Simultaneous poems (or poèmes simultanés) were recited by a group of speakers who, collectively, produced a chaotic and confusing set of voices. These poems are considered manifestations of modernity including advertising, technology, and conflict. Unlike movements such as Expressionism, Dadaism did not take a negative view of modernity and the urban life. The chaotic urban and futuristic world is considered natural terrain that opens up new ideas for life and art.

Music

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Dada was not confined to the visual and literary arts; its influence reached into sound and music. Kurt Schwitters developed what he called sound poems, while Francis Picabia and Georges Ribemont-Dessaignes composed Dada music performed at the Festival Dada in Paris on 26 May 1920. Other composers such as Erwin Schulhoff, Hans Heusser and Alberto Savinio all wrote Dada music, while members of Les Six collaborated with members of the Dada movement and had their works performed at Dada gatherings. Erik Satie also dabbled with Dadaist ideas during his career, although he is primarily associated with musical Impressionism.

Legacy

The Janco Dada Museum, named after Marcel Janco, in Ein Hod, Israel

While broadly based, the movement was unstable. By 1924 in Paris, Dada was melding into Surrealism, and artists had gone on to other ideas and movements, including Surrealism, social realism and other forms of modernism. Some theorists argue that Dada was actually the beginning of postmodern art.

By the dawn of the Second World War, many of the European Dadaists had emigrated to the United States. Some (Otto Freundlich, Walter Serner) died in death camps under Adolf Hitler, who actively persecuted the kind of "degenerate art" that he considered Dada to represent. The movement became less active as post-war optimism led to the development of new movements in art and literature.

Dada is a named influence and reference of various anti-art and political and cultural movements, including the Situationist International and culture jamming groups like the Cacophony Society. Upon breaking up in July 2012, anarchist pop band Chumbawamba issued a statement which compared their own legacy with that of the Dada art movement.

At the same time that the Zürich Dadaists were making noise and spectacle at the Cabaret Voltaire, Lenin was planning his revolutionary plans for Russia in a nearby apartment. Tom Stoppard used this coincidence as a premise for his play Travesties (1974), which includes Tzara, Lenin, and James Joyce as characters. French writer Dominique Noguez imagined Lenin as a member of the Dada group in his tongue-in-cheek Lénine Dada (1989).

The former building of the Cabaret Voltaire fell into disrepair until it was occupied from January to March 2002, by a group proclaiming themselves Neo-Dadaists, led by Mark Divo. The group included Jan Thieler, Ingo Giezendanner, Aiana Calugar, Lennie Lee, and Dan Jones. After their eviction, the space was turned into a museum dedicated to the history of Dada. The work of Lee and Jones remained on the walls of the new museum.

Several notable retrospectives have examined the influence of Dada upon art and society. In 1967, a large Dada retrospective was held in Paris. In 2006, the Museum of Modern Art in New York City mounted a Dada exhibition in partnership with the National Gallery of Art in Washington D.C. and the Centre Pompidou in Paris. The LTM label has released a large number of Dada-related sound recordings, including interviews with artists such as Tzara, Picabia, Schwitters, Arp, and Huelsenbeck, and musical repertoire including Satie, Ribemont-Dessaignes, Picabia, and Nelly van Doesburg.

Musician Frank Zappa was a self-proclaimed Dadaist after learning of the movement:

In the early days, I didn't even know what to call the stuff my life was made of. You can imagine my delight when I discovered that someone in a distant land had the same idea—AND a nice, short name for it.

Art techniques developed

Dadaism also blurred the line between literary and visual arts:

Dada is the groundwork to abstract art and sound poetry, a starting point for performance art, a prelude to postmodernism, an influence on pop art, a celebration of antiart to be later embraced for anarcho-political uses in the 1960s and the movement that laid the foundation for Surrealism.

Collage

The Dadaists imitated the techniques developed during the cubist movement through the pasting of cut pieces of paper items, but extended their art to encompass items such as transportation tickets, maps, plastic wrappers, etc. to portray aspects of life, rather than representing objects viewed as still life. They also invented the “chance collage" technique, involving dropping torn scraps of paper onto a larger sheet and then pasting the pieces wherever they landed.

Cut-up technique

Cut-up technique is an extension of collage to words themselves, Tristan Tzara describes this in the Dada Manifesto:

TO MAKE A DADAIST POEM

Take a newspaper.

Take some scissors.

Choose from this paper an article of the length you want to make your poem.

Cut out the article.

Next carefully cut out each of the words that makes up this article and put them all in a bag.

Shake gently.

Next take out each cutting one after the other.

Copy conscientiously in the order in which they left the bag.

The poem will resemble you.

And there you are – an infinitely original author of charming sensibility, even though unappreciated by the vulgar herd.

Photomontage

Raoul Hausmann, ABCD (self-portrait), a photomontage from 1923–24

The Dadaists – the "monteurs" (mechanics) – used scissors and glue rather than paintbrushes and paints to express their views of modern life through images presented by the media. A variation on the collage technique, photomontage utilized actual or reproductions of real photographs printed in the press. In Cologne, Max Ernst used images from the First World War to illustrate messages of the destruction of war.

Raoul Hausmann, Mechanischer Kopf (Der Geist unserer Zeit) (Mechanical Head ), c. 1920

Assemblage

The assemblages were three-dimensional variations of the collage – the assembly of everyday objects to produce meaningful or meaningless (relative to the war) pieces of work including war objects and trash. Objects were nailed, screwed or fastened together in different fashions. Assemblages could be seen in the round or could be hung on a wall.

Readymades

Marcel Duchamp began to view the manufactured objects of his collection as objects of art, which he called "readymades". He would add signatures and titles to some, converting them into artwork that he called "readymade aided" or "rectified readymades". Duchamp wrote: "One important characteristic was the short sentence which I occasionally inscribed on the 'readymade.' That sentence, instead of describing the object like a title, was meant to carry the mind of the spectator towards other regions more verbal. Sometimes I would add a graphic detail of presentation which in order to satisfy my craving for alliterations, would be called 'readymade aided.'" One such example of Duchamp's readymade works is the urinal that was turned onto its back, signed "R. Mutt", titled Fountain, and submitted to the Society of Independent Artists exhibition that year, though it was not displayed.

Artists

Dragan Aleksić (1901–1958), Yugoslavia

Louis Aragon (1897–1982), France

Jean Arp (1886–1966), Germany, France

Sophie Taeuber-Arp (1889–1943) Switzerland, France

Johannes Baader (1875–1955) Germany

Hugo Ball (1886–1927), Germany, Switzerland

André Breton (1896–1966), France

John Covert (painter) (1882–1960), US

Jean Crotti (1878–1958), France

Otto Dix (1891–1969), Germany

Theo van Doesburg (1883–1931) Netherlands

Marcel Duchamp (1887–1968), France

Suzanne Duchamp (1889–1963), France

Paul Éluard (1895–1952), France

Max Ernst (1891–1976), Germany, US

Julius Evola (1898–1974), Italy

George Grosz (1893–1959), Germany, France, US

Raoul Hausmann (1886–1971), Germany

John Heartfield (1891–1968), Germany, USSR, Czechoslovakia, UK

Hannah Höch (1889–1978), Germany

Richard Huelsenbeck (1892–1974), Germany

Georges Hugnet (1906–1974), France

Marcel Janco (1895–1984), Romania, Israel

Elsa von Freytag-Loringhoven (1874–1927), Germany, US

Clément Pansaers (1885–1922), Belgium

Francis Picabia (1879–1953), France

Man Ray (1890–1976), France, US

Georges Ribemont-Dessaignes (1884–1974), France

Hans Richter, Germany, Switzerland

Juliette Roche Gleizes (1884–1980), France

Kurt Schwitters (1887–1948), Germany

Walter Serner (1889–1942), Austria

Philippe Soupault (1897–1990), France

Tristan Tzara (1896–1963), Romania, France

Beatrice Wood (1893–1998), US

See also

Art intervention

The Central Council of Dada for the World Revolution

Dadaglobe

List of Dadaists

Épater la bourgeoisie

Happening

Incoherents

Shock art

Transgressive art

References

^ World War I and Dada, Museum of Modern Art (MoMA).

^ Francis M. Naumann, New York Dada, 1915–23, Abrams, 1994, ISBN 0-81093676-3

^ Mario de Micheli (2006). Las vanguardias artísticas del siglo XX. Alianza Forma. pp. 135–37.

^ Trachtman, Paul. "A Brief History of Dada". Smithsonian Magazine. Retrieved 14 January 2017.

^ a b c Schneede, Uwe M. (1979), George Grosz, His life and work, New York: Universe Books

^ a b c Budd, Dona, The Language of Art Knowledge, Pomegranate Communications.

^ Richard Huelsenbeck, En avant Dada: Eine Geschichte des Dadaismus, Paul Steegemann Verlag, Hannover, 1920, Erste Ausgabe (Die Silbergäule): English translation in Robert Motherwell, The Dada Painters and Poets, New York, Wittenborn, Schultz, 1951

^ Dada, Tate

^ Timothy Stroud, Emanuela Di Lallo, 'Art of the Twentieth Century: 1900–1919, the avant-garde movements', Volume 1 of Art of the Twentieth Century, Skyra, 2006, ISBN 887624604-5

^ Middleton, J. C. (1962). Bolshevism in Art": Dada and Politics". Texas Studies in Literature and Language. 4 (3): 408–30. JSTOR 40753524.

^ Ian Chilvers, John Glaves-Smith, A Dictionary of Modern and Contemporary Art. Retrieved 13 May 2020

^ Dada, The art history, retrieved March 13, 2017.

^ Anti-art, Art that challenges the existing accepted definitions of art, Tate

^ a b "Dada", Dawn Adès and Matthew Gale, Grove Art Online, Oxford University Press, 2009 (subscription required)

^ Roselee Goldberg, Thomas & Hudson, L'univers de l'art, Chapter 4, Le surréalisme, Les représentations pré-Dada à Paris, ISBN 978-2-87811-380-8

^ a b Richter, Hans (1965), Dada: Art and Anti-art, New York and Toronto: Oxford University Press

^ Joan M. Marter, The Grove Encyclopedia of American Art, Volume 1, Oxford University Press, 2011, p. 6, ISBN 0195335791

^ DADA: Cities, National Gallery of Art, archived from the original on 2008-11-02, retrieved 2008-10-19

^ a b Fred S. Kleiner (2006), Gardner's Art Through the Ages (12th ed.), Wadsworth Publishing, p. 754

^ Hopkins, David, A Companion to Dada and Surrealism, Volume 10 of Blackwell Companions to Art History, John Wiley & Sons, May 2, 2016, p. 83, ISBN 1118476182

^ Elger 2004, p. 6.

^ Wellek, René (1955). A History of Modern Criticism: French, Italian and Spanish criticism, 1900-1950. Yale University Press. p. 91. ISBN 9780300054514. Tzara second Dada manifesto,.

^ Novero, Cecilia (2010). Antidiets of the Avant-Garde. University of Minnesota Press. p. 62.

^ Elger 2004, p. 7.

^ Greeley, Anne. "Cabaret Voltaire". Routledge. Retrieved 31 July 2019.

^ Tom Sandqvist, DADA EAST: The Romanians of Cabaret Voltaire, London MIT Press, 2006.

^ a b "Cabaret Voltaire: A Night Out at History's Wildest Nightclub". BBC. 2016. Retrieved 31 July 2019.

^ "Introduction: "Everybody can Dada. National Gallery of Art. Archived from the original on 2 November 2008. Retrieved 10 May 2012.

^ Marcel Janco, "Dada at Two Speeds," trans. in Lucy R. Lippard, Dadas on Art (Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1971), p. 36.

^ Jenkins, Ellen Jan (2011). Andrea, Alfred J. (ed.). World History Encyclopedia. ABC-CLIO – via Credo Reference.

^ Rasula, Jed (2015). Destruction was My Beatrice: Dada and the Unmaking of the Twentieth Century. New York: Basic Books. pp. 145–146. ISBN 9780465089963.

^ Europe of Cultures. "Tristan Tzara speaks of the Dada Movement", September 6, 1963. Retrieved on July 2, 2015.

^ Elger 2004, p. 35.

^ Naumann, Francis M. (1994). New York Dada. New York: Abrams. ISBN 0810936763.

^ Hans Richter, Dada: Art and Anti-Art, London: Thames & Hudson (1997); p. 122

^ a b Dada, Dickermann, National Gallery of Art, Washington, 2006 p443

^ Dada, Dickermann, National Gallery of Art, Washington, 2006 p99

^ Schaefer, Robert A. (September 7, 2006), "Das Ist Dada–An Exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art in NYC", Double Exposure, archived from the original on October 9, 2007, retrieved June 12, 2007

^ a b Fountain' most influential piece of modern art, Independent, December 2, 2004

^ "Duchamp's urinal tops art survey", BBC News December 1, 2004.

^ Duchamp, Marcel trans. and qtd. in Gammel, Irene. Baroness Elsa: Gender, Dada and Everyday Modernity. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 2002, 224.

^ Gammel, Baroness Elsa, 224–225.

^ Marc Dachy, Dada : La révolte de l'art, Paris, Gallimard / Centre Pompidou, collection "Découvertes Gallimard" (nº 476), 2005.

^ Holland Dada, Amsterdam, 1974

^ Zenit: International Review of Arts and Culture

^ Dubravka Djurić, Miško Šuvaković. Impossible Histories: Historical Avant-gardes, Neo-avant-gardes, and Post-avant-gardes in Yugoslavia, 1918–1991, p. 132, MIT Press, 2003. ISBN 9780262042161; Jovanov Jasna, Kujundžić Dragan, "Yougo-Dada". "Crisis and the Arts: The History of Dada", Vol. IV, The Eastern Orbit: Russia, Georgia, Ukraine, Central Europe and Japan, General Editor Stephen C. Foster, G.K. Hall & Comp. Publishers, New York 1998, 41–62; Jasna Jovanov, Demistifikacija apokrifa: dadaizam na jugoslovenskim prostorima 1920–1922, Novi Sad: Apokrif, 1999.

^ Julius Evola – International Dada Archive

^ 「三面怪人 ダダ」が「ダダイズム100周年」を祝福！スイス大使館で開催された記者発表会に登場！ (in Japanese). m-78.jp. 2016-05-19. Retrieved 2016-06-08.

^ "Dada Celebrates Dadaism's 100th Anniversary". tokusatsunetwork.com. 2016-05-19. Retrieved 2016-06-08.

^ https://www.nytimes.com/1987/11/01/magazine/butoh-dance-of-darkness.html

^ a b Margarita Tupitsyn; Victor Tupitsyn; Olga Burenina-Petrova; Natasha Kurchanova. Margarita Tupitsyn and the Museo Reina Sofía Editorial Activities (ed.). Russian Dada : 1914-1924 (pdf). ISBN 978-84-8026-573-7. Retrieved 17 March 2020.

^ Russian Dada 1914–1924 by Margarita Tupitsyn (Editor), MIT Press: September 4, 2018]

^ Coutinho, Eduardo (2018). Brazilian Literature as World Literature. New York: Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 158. ISBN 9781501323263.

^ Elger 2004, p. 12.

^ Morrison, Jeffrey; Krobb, Florian (1997). Text Into Image, Image Into Text: Proceedings of the Interdisciplinary. Atlanta: Rodopi. p. 234. ISBN 9042001526.

^ a b James Hayward. "Festival Paris Dada  | Avant-Garde Art | LTM". Retrieved 17 March 2020.

^ Ingram, Paul (2017). Songs, Anti-Symphonies and Sodomist Music: Dadaist Music in Zurich, Berlin and Paris. Retrieved 17 March 2020.

^ Locher, David (1999), "Unacknowledged Roots and Blatant Imitation: Postmodernism and the Dada Movement", Electronic Journal of Sociology, 4 (1), archived from the original on 2007-02-23, retrieved 2007-04-25

^ "Chumbawamba". Retrieved 10 July 2012.

^ 2002 occupation by neo-Dadaists Prague Post

^ LTM Recordings

^ Frank Zappa, The Real Frank Zappa Book, p. 162

^ Marc Lowenthal, translator's introduction to Francis Picabia's I Am a Beautiful Monster: Poetry, Prose, and Provocation

^ "manifestos: dada manifesto on feeble love and bitter love by tristan tzara, 12th december 1920". 391. 1920-12-12. Retrieved 2011-06-27. This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain.

^ "DADA – Techniques – photomontage". Nga.gov. Archived from the original on 2011-06-25. Retrieved 2011-06-11.

^ "DADA – Techniques – assemblage". Nga.gov. Archived from the original on 2011-07-16. Retrieved 2011-06-11.

^ "The Writings of Marcel Duchamp" ISBN 0-306-80341-0

Sources

Elger, Dietmar  (2004). Uta Grosenick  (ed.). Dadaism. Taschen. ISBN 9783822829462.

Bibliography

The Dada Almanac, ed Richard Huelsenbeck , re-edited and translated by Malcolm Green et al., Atlas Press, with texts by Hans Arp, Johannes Baader, Hugo Ball, Paul Citröen, Paul Dermée, Daimonides, Max Goth, John Heartfield, Raoul Hausmann, Richard Huelsenbeck, Vincente Huidobro, Mario D'Arezzo, Adon Lacroix, Walter Mehring, Francis Picabia, Georges Ribemont-Dessaignes, Alexander Sesqui, Philippe Soupault, Tristan Tzara. ISBN 0-947757-62-7

Blago Bung, Blago Bung, Hugo Ball's Tenderenda, Richard Huelsenbeck's Fantastic Prayers, & Walter Serner's Last Loosening – three key texts of Zurich ur-Dada. Translated and introduced by Malcolm Green. Atlas Press, ISBN 0-947757-86-4

Ball, Hugo. Flight Out Of Time (University of California Press: Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1996)

Bergius, Hanne Dada in Europa – Dokumente und Werke (co-ed. Eberhard Roters), in: Tendenzen der zwanziger Jahre. 15. Europäische Kunstausstellung, Catalogue, Vol.III, Berlin: Dietrich Reimer Verlag, 1977. ISBN 978-3-496-01000-5

Bergius, Hanne Das Lachen Dadas. Die Berliner Dadaisten und ihre Aktionen. Gießen: Anabas-Verlag 1989. ISBN 978-3-870-38141-7

Bergius, Hanne Dada Triumphs! Dada Berlin, 1917–1923. Artistry of Polarities. Montages – Metamechanics – Manifestations. Translated by Brigitte Pichon. Vol. V. of the ten editions of Crisis and the Arts: the History of Dada, ed. by Stephen Foster, New Haven, Connecticut, Thomson/Gale 2003. ISBN 978-0-816173-55-6.

Jones, Dafydd W. Dada 1916 In Theory: Practices of Critical Resistance (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2014). ISBN 978-1-781-380-208

Biro, M. The Dada Cyborg: Visions of the New Human in Weimar Berlin. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2009. ISBN 0-8166-3620-6

Dachy, Marc. Journal du mouvement Dada 1915–1923, Genève, Albert Skira, 1989 (Grand Prix du Livre d'Art, 1990)

Dada & les dadaïsmes, Paris, Gallimard, Folio Essais, n° 257, 1994.

Jovanov, Jasna. Demistifikacija apokrifa: Dadaizam na jugoslovenskim prostorima, Novi Sad/Apostrof 1999.

Dada : La révolte de l'art, Paris, Gallimard / Centre Pompidou, collection "Découvertes Gallimard" (nº 476), 2005.

Archives Dada / Chronique, Paris, Hazan, 2005.

Dada, catalogue d'exposition, Centre Pompidou, 2005.

Durozoi, Gérard. Dada et les arts rebelles, Paris, Hazan, Guide des Arts, 2005

Gammel, Irene. Baroness Elsa: Gender, Dada and Everyday Modernity. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 2002.

Hoffman, Irene. Documents of Dada and Surrealism: Dada and Surrealist Journals in the Mary Reynolds Collection, Ryerson and Burnham Libraries, The Art Institute of Chicago.

Hopkins, David, A Companion to Dada and Surrealism, Volume 10 of Blackwell Companions to Art History, John Wiley & Sons, May 2, 2016, ISBN 1118476182

Huelsenbeck, Richard. Memoirs of a Dada Drummer, (University of California Press: Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1991)

Jones, Dafydd. Dada Culture (New York and Amsterdam: Rodopi Verlag, 2006)

Lavin, Maud. Cut With the Kitchen Knife: The Weimar Photomontages of Hannah Höch. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1993.

Lemoine, Serge. Dada, Paris, Hazan, coll. L'Essentiel.

Lista, Giovanni. Dada libertin & libertaire, Paris, L'insolite, 2005.

Melzer, Annabelle. 1976. Dada and Surrealist Performance. PAJ Books ser. Baltimore and London: The Johns Hopkins UP, 1994. ISBN 0-8018-4845-8.

Novero, Cecilia. "Antidiets of the Avant-Garde: From Futurist Cooking to Eat Art." (University of Minnesota Press, 2010)

Richter, Hans. Dada: Art and Anti-Art (London: Thames and Hudson, 1965)

Sanouillet, Michel. Dada à Paris, Paris, Jean-Jacques Pauvert, 1965, Flammarion, 1993, CNRS, 2005

Sanouillet, Michel. Dada in Paris, Cambridge, Massachusetts, The MIT Press, 2009

Schippers, K. Holland Dada, Amsterdam, Em. Querido, 1974

Schneede, Uwe M. George Grosz, His life and work (New York: Universe Books, 1979)

Verdier, Aurélie. L'ABCdaire de Dada, Paris, Flammarion, 2005.

Filmography

1968: Germany-DADA: An Alphabet of German DADAism on YouTube, Documentary by Universal Education, Presented By Kartes Video Communications, 56 Minutes

1971: DADA 'Archives du XXe siècle' on YouTube, Une émission produite par Jean José Marchand, réalisée par Philippe Collin et Hubert Knapp, Ce documentaire a été diffusé pour la première fois sur la RTF le 28.03.1971, 267 min.

2016: Das Prinzip Dada, Documentary by Marina Rumjanzewa , Schweizer Radio und Fernsehen (Sternstunde Kunst ), 52 Minutes (in German)

2016 Dada Art Movement History – "Dada on Tour" on YouTube, Bruno Art Group in collaboration with Cabaret Voltaire & Art Stage Singapore 2016, 27 minutes

External links

 Library resources about

Dada

* * *

Resources in your library

Resources in other libraries

 Wikiquote has quotations related to: Dada

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dada.

Dada Companion, bibliographies, chronology, artists' profiles, places, techniques, reception

Dada at Curlie

The International Dada Archive, University of Iowa, early Dada periodicals, online scans of publications

Dadart, history, bibliography, documents, and news

Dada audio recordings at LTM

New York dada (magazine), Marcel Duchamp and Man Ray, April, 1921, Bibliothèque Kandinsky, Centre Pompidou (access online)

Kunsthaus Zürich, one of the world's largest Dada collections

"A Brief History of Dada", Smithsonian Magazine

Khan Academy Art 1010, Introduction to Dada

National Gallery of Art 2006 Dada Exhibition

Hathi Trust full-text Dadaism publications online

Manifestos

Text of Hugo Ball's 1916 Dada Manifesto

Text of Tristan Tzara's 1918 Dada Manifesto

Excerpts of Tristan Tzara's Dada Manifesto (1918) and Lecture on Dada (1922)

Seven Dada Manifestos by Tristan Tzara

v

t

e

Dada

New York Dada 
Marcel Duchamp

Francis Picabia

Man Ray

Beatrice Wood

Louise Norton

Elsa von Freytag-Loringhoven

Juliette Roche Gleizes

Jean Crotti

European Dada 
Dragan Aleksić

Louis Aragon

Jean Arp

Johannes Baader

Alice Bailly

Hugo Ball

André Breton

Gabrièle Buffet-Picabia

Serge Charchoune

Arthur Cravan

Jean Crotti

Otto Dix

Theo van Doesburg

Marcel Duchamp

Suzanne Duchamp

Paul Éluard

Max Ernst

Julius Evola

George Grosz

Raoul Hausmann

John Heartfield

Emmy Hennings

Hannah Höch

Richard Huelsenbeck

Iliazd

Marcel Janco

Elsa von Freytag-Loringhoven

Clément Pansaers

Francis Picabia

Man Ray

Georges Ribemont-Dessaignes

Jacques Rigaut

Henri-Pierre Roché

Kurt Schwitters

Walter Serner

Philippe Soupault

Sophie Taeuber-Arp

Julien Torma

Tristan Tzara

Jacques Vaché

Works 
Bicycle Wheel

Fountain

Bottle Rack

Dada-Review

Prelude to a Broken Arm

Why Not Sneeze, Rose Sélavy?

L.H.O.O.Q.

Tulip Hysteria Co-ordinating

Rrose Sélavy

Readymades of Marcel Duchamp

The Gas Heart (1921 play)

Handkerchief of Clouds (1924 play)

Publications 
Dada Manifesto

291 (magazine)

391 (magazine)

The Blind Man (magazine)

Dadaglobe

Influences 
Alfred Jarry

Incoherents

Eugène Bataille (aka Sapeck)

Parade (ballet)

Influenced 
Conceptual art

Surrealism

Nouveau réalisme

Pop art

Fluxus

Monochrome painting

Downtown music

Related 
Alfred Stieglitz (photographer, art promoter)

Walter Conrad Arensberg (art collector)

291 (art gallery)

Galeries Dalmau

Found object

Anti-art

Anarchism and the arts

Anti-anti-art

Anti-poetry

Appropriation (art)

Art intervention

Cabaret Voltaire

Noise music

Épater la bourgeoisie

Shock art

Beatrice Wood: Mama of Dada (1993 documentary)

Man and Boy: Dada (2006 opera)

v

t

e

Modernism

Milestones 
Le Déjeuner sur l’herbe (1862–1863)

Olympia (1863)

A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte (1886)

Mont Sainte-Victoir (1887)

The Starry Night (1889)

Ubu Roi (1896)

Verklärte Nacht (1899)

Le bonheur de vivre (1905–1906)

Les Demoiselles d'Avignon (1907)

The Dance (1909–1910)

The Firebird (1910)

Afternoon of a Faun (1912)

Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2 (1912)

The Rite of Spring (1913)

In Search of Lost Time (1913–1927)

The Metamorphosis (1915)

Black Square (1915)

Fountain (1917)

The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari (1920)

Six Characters in Search of an Author (1921)

Ulysses (1922)

The Waste Land (1922)

The Magic Mountain (1924)

Battleship Potemkin (1925)

The Sun Also Rises (1926)

The Threepenny Opera (1928)

The Sound and the Fury (1929)

Un Chien Andalou (1929)

Villa Savoye (1931)

The Blue Lotus (1936)

Fallingwater (1936)

Waiting for Godot (1953)

Literature 
Guillaume Apollinaire

Djuna Barnes

Tadeusz Borowski

André Breton

Mikhail Bulgakov

Anton Chekhov

Joseph Conrad

Alfred Döblin

E. M. Forster

William Faulkner

Gustave Flaubert

Ford Madox Ford

André Gide

Knut Hamsun

Jaroslav Hašek

Ernest Hemingway

Hermann Hesse

James Joyce

Franz Kafka

Arthur Koestler

D. H. Lawrence

Wyndham Lewis

Thomas Mann

Katherine Mansfield

Filippo Tommaso Marinetti

Guy de Maupassant

Robert Musil

Katherine Anne Porter

Marcel Proust

Gertrude Stein

Italo Svevo

Virginia Woolf

Poetry 
Anna Akhmatova

Richard Aldington

W. H. Auden

Charles Baudelaire

Luca Caragiale

Constantine P. Cavafy

Blaise Cendrars

Hart Crane

H.D.

Robert Desnos

T. S. Eliot

Paul Éluard

Odysseas Elytis

F. S. Flint

Stefan George

Max Jacob

Federico García Lorca

Amy Lowell

Robert Lowell

Mina Loy

Stéphane Mallarmé

Marianne Moore

Wilfred Owen

Octavio Paz

Fernando Pessoa

Ezra Pound

Lionel Richard

Rainer Maria Rilke

Arthur Rimbaud

Giorgos Seferis

Wallace Stevens

Dylan Thomas

Tristan Tzara

Paul Valéry

William Carlos Williams

W. B. Yeats

Visual art 
Josef Albers

Jean Arp

Balthus

George Bellows

Umberto Boccioni

Pierre Bonnard

Georges Braque

Constantin Brâncuși

Alexander Calder

Mary Cassatt

Paul Cézanne

Marc Chagall

Giorgio de Chirico

Camille Claudel

Joseph Cornell

Joseph Csaky

Salvador Dalí

Edgar Degas

Raoul Dufy

Willem de Kooning

Robert Delaunay

Charles Demuth

Otto Dix

Theo van Doesburg

Marcel Duchamp

James Ensor

Max Ernst

Jacob Epstein

Paul Gauguin

Alberto Giacometti

Vincent van Gogh

Natalia Goncharova

Julio González

Juan Gris

George Grosz

Raoul Hausmann

Jacques Hérold

Hannah Höch

Edward Hopper

Frida Kahlo

Wassily Kandinsky

Ernst Ludwig Kirchner

Paul Klee

Oskar Kokoschka

Pyotr Konchalovsky

André Lhote

Fernand Léger

Franz Marc

Albert Marque

Jean Marchand

René Magritte

Kazimir Malevich

Édouard Manet

Henri Matisse

Colin McCahon

Jean Metzinger

Joan Miró

Amedeo Modigliani

Piet Mondrian

Claude Monet

Henry Moore

Edvard Munch

Emil Nolde

Georgia O'Keeffe

Méret Oppenheim

Francis Picabia

Pablo Picasso

Camille Pissarro

Man Ray

Odilon Redon

Pierre-Auguste Renoir

Auguste Rodin

Henri Rousseau

Egon Schiele

Georges Seurat

Paul Signac

Alfred Sisley

Edward Steichen

Alfred Stieglitz

Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec

Édouard Vuillard

Grant Wood

Lin Fengmian

Music 
George Antheil

Milton Babbitt

Jean Barraqué

Béla Bartók

Alban Berg

Luciano Berio

Nadia Boulanger

Pierre Boulez

John Cage

Elliott Carter

Aaron Copland

Heitor Villa-Lobos

Henry Cowell

Henri Dutilleux

Morton Feldman

Henryk Górecki

Josef Matthias Hauer

Paul Hindemith

Arthur Honegger

Charles Ives

Leoš Janáček

György Ligeti

Witold Lutosławski

Olivier Messiaen

Luigi Nono

Harry Partch

Krzysztof Penderecki

Sergei Prokofiev

Luigi Russolo

Erik Satie

Pierre Schaeffer

Arnold Schoenberg

Dmitri Shostakovich

Richard Strauss

Igor Stravinsky

Karol Szymanowski

Edgard Varèse

Anton Webern

Kurt Weill

Iannis Xenakis

Theatre 
Edward Albee

Maxwell Anderson

Jean Anouilh

Antonin Artaud

Samuel Beckett

Bertolt Brecht

Anton Chekhov

Friedrich Dürrenmatt

Jean Genet

Maxim Gorky

Walter Hasenclever

Henrik Ibsen

William Inge

Eugène Ionesco

Alfred Jarry

Georg Kaiser

Maurice Maeterlinck

Vladimir Mayakovsky

Arthur Miller

Seán O'Casey

Eugene O'Neill

John Osborne

Luigi Pirandello

Erwin Piscator

George Bernard Shaw

August Strindberg

John Millington Synge

Ernst Toller

Frank Wedekind

Thornton Wilder

Stanisław Ignacy Witkiewicz

Film 
Robert Aldrich

Michelangelo Antonioni

Ingmar Bergman

Anton Giulio Bragaglia

Robert Bresson

Luis Buñuel

Marcel Carné

Charlie Chaplin

René Clair

Jean Cocteau

Maya Deren

Alexander Dovzhenko

Carl Theodor Dreyer

Viking Eggeling

Sergei Eisenstein

Jean Epstein

Federico Fellini

Robert J. Flaherty

Sam Fuller

Abel Gance

Isidore Isou

Buster Keaton

Lev Kuleshov

Fritz Lang

Ida Lupino

Marcel L'Herbier

Georges Méliès

F. W. Murnau

Georg Wilhelm Pabst

Vsevolod Pudovkin

Nicholas Ray

Jean Renoir

Walter Ruttmann

Victor Sjöström

Josef von Sternberg

Dziga Vertov

Jean Vigo

Orson Welles

Robert Wiene

Dance 
George Balanchine

Merce Cunningham

Clotilde von Derp

Sergei Diaghilev

Isadora Duncan

Michel Fokine

Loie Fuller

Martha Graham

Hanya Holm

Doris Humphrey

Léonide Massine

Vaslav Nijinsky

Alwin Nikolais

Alexander Sakharoff

Ted Shawn

Anna Sokolow

Ruth St. Denis

Helen Tamiris

Charles Weidman

Mary Wigman

Architecture 
Marcel Breuer

Gordon Bunshaft

Jack Allen Charney

Walter Gropius

Hector Guimard

Raymond Hood

Victor Horta

Friedensreich Hundertwasser

Philip Johnson

Louis Kahn

Le Corbusier

Adolf Loos

Konstantin Melnikov

Erich Mendelsohn

Pier Luigi Nervi

Richard Neutra

Oscar Niemeyer

Hans Poelzig

Antonin Raymond

Gerrit Rietveld

Eero Saarinen

Rudolf Steiner

Edward Durell Stone

Louis Sullivan

Vladimir Tatlin

Paul Troost

Ludwig Mies van der Rohe

Frank Lloyd Wright

Related 
American modernism

Armory Show

Art Deco

Art Nouveau

Ashcan School

Avant-garde

Ballets Russes

Bauhaus

Buddhist modernism

Constructivism

Cubism

Dada

Degenerate art

De Stijl

Der Blaue Reiter

Die Brücke

Ecomodernism

Expressionism

Expressionist music

Fauvism

Fourth dimension in art

Fourth dimension in literature

Futurism

Grosvenor School of Modern Art

Hanshinkan Modernism

High modernism

Imagism

Impressionism

Incoherents

International Style

Late modernism

Late modernity

Lettrism

List of art movements

List of avant-garde artists

List of modernist poets

Lyrical abstraction

Maximalism

Minimalism

Modern art

Modernity

Neo-Dada

Neo-primitivism

New Objectivity

Orphism

Post-Impressionism

Postminimalism

Postmodernism

Postmodernist film

Reactionary modernism

Metamodernism

Remodernism

Romanticism

Second Viennese School

Structural film

Surrealism

Symbolism

Synchromism

Tonalism

Warsaw Autumn

v

t

e

Avant-garde movements

Visual art 
Abstract expressionism

Art Nouveau

Art & Language

Conceptual art

Constructivism

Cubism

Grosvenor School

Proto-Cubism

Cubo-Futurism

De Stijl

Devětsil

Divisionism

Fauvism

Impressionism

Neo-Impressionism

Post-Impressionism

Color Field

Incoherents

Lyrical Abstraction

Mail art

Minimalism

Mir iskusstva

Multidimensional art

Neue Slowenische Kunst

Nonconformism

Performance art

Pop art

Process art

Rayonism

Suprematism

Vorticism

Nouveau réalisme

Literature

and poetry 
Acmeism

Angry Penguins

Asemic writing

Conceptual poetry

Cyberpunk

Ego-Futurism

Experimental literature

Flarf poetry

Hungry generation

Imaginism

Language poets

Neoavanguardia

Neoteric

Nouveau roman

Oberiu

Oulipo

Slam poetry

Ultraísmo

Visual poetry

Zaum

Music

By style 
Funk

Jazz

Metal

Pop

Rock
Prog

Punk

Others 
Aleatoric music

Ars subtilior

Atonal music

Electroacoustic music

Electronic music
Industrial music

Experimental pop

Free jazz
Free improvisation

Futurism

Microtonal music

Minimal music
Drone music

Music theatre

Musique concrète

New Complexity

No wave

Noise music

Post-rock

Rock in Opposition

Second Viennese School

Serialism

Spectral music

Stochastic music

Textural music

Totalism

Twelve-tone technique

Cinema

and theatre 
Cinéma pur

Dogme 95

Drop Art

Epic theatre

Experimental film

Experimental theatre

Postdramatic theatre

Remodernist film

Structural film

Theatre of the Absurd

Theatre of Cruelty

General 
Bauhaus

Constructivism

Dada

Expressionism

Fluxus

Futurism

Lettrism

Modernism

Minimalism

Postminimalism

Neo-minimalism

Neo-Dada

Neoism

Postmodernism

Late modernism

Primitivism

Russian Futurism

Russian symbolism

Situationist International

Social realism

Socialist realism

Surrealism

Symbolism

Book

v

t

e

Schools of poetry

Akhmatova's Orphans

Angry Penguins

Auden Group

The Beats

Black Arts Movement

Black Mountain poets

British Poetry Revival

Cairo poets

Castalian Band

Cavalier poets

Chhayavaad

Churchyard poets

Confessionalists

Créolité

Cyclic Poets

Dada

Deep image

Della Cruscans

Dolce Stil Novo

Dymock poets

Ecopoetry

The poets of Elan

Flarf

Fugitives

Garip

Gay Saber

Generation of '27

Generation of the '30s

Generation of '98

Georgian poets

Goliard

The Group

Harlem Renaissance

Harvard Aesthetes

Hungry generation

Imagism

Informationist poetry

Jindyworobaks

Lake Poets

Language poets

Martian poetry

Metaphysical poets

Misty Poets

Modernist poetry

The Movement

Négritude

Neotericism

New American Poetry

New Apocalyptics

New Formalism

New York School

Objectivists

Others

Parnassian poets

La Pléiade

Rhymers' Club

San Francisco Renaissance

Scottish Renaissance

Sicilian School

Sons of Ben

Southern Agrarians

Spasmodic poets

Sung poetry

Surrealism

Symbolism

Uranian poetry

Zutiste

v

t

e

Marcel Duchamp (works)

Artworks 
Portrait of Dr. Dumouchel (1910)

The Bush (1910–11)

Yvonne and Magdeleine Torn in Tatters (1911)

Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2 (1912)

Bicycle Wheel (1913)

Bottle Rack (1914)

In Advance of the Broken Arm (1915)

The Bride Stripped Bare by Her Bachelors, Even (1915–1923)

Apolinère Enameled (c. 1916)

Tulip Hysteria Co-ordinating (1917)

Fountain (1917)

L.H.O.O.Q. (1919)

Belle Haleine, Eau de Voilette (1920–21)

Why Not Sneeze, Rose Sélavy? (1921)

Monte Carto Bonds (1924)

La Boîte-en-valise (1934-1966)

Étant donnés (1946–1966)

Films 
Anemic Cinema (1926)

8 × 8: A Chess Sonata in 8 Movements (1957)

Related 
Readymades of Marcel Duchamp
Anti-art

Dada

New York Dada

The Blind Man

Fountain Archive

Portrait of Marcel Duchamp

Alexina Duchamp (wife)

Jacques Villon (brother)

Raymond Duchamp-Villon (brother)

Suzanne Duchamp (sister)

Marcel Duchamp Prize

v

t

e

Western art movements

Ancient 
Egyptian

Greek

Etruscan

Roman

Medieval 
Early Christian

Migration Period

Anglo-Saxon

Visigothic

Pre-Romanesque

Insular

Viking

Byzantine

Merovingian

Carolingian

Ottonian

Romanesque

Norman-Sicilian

Gothic (International Gothic)

Renaissance 
Italian Renaissance

Early Netherlandish

German Renaissance

Antwerp Mannerists

Danube school

High Renaissance

Venetian painting

Romanism

Mannerism

Fontainebleau

Northern Mannerism

17th century 
Baroque

Caravaggisti

Classicism

Dutch Golden Age

Flemish Baroque

18th century 
Rocaille

Rococo

Neoclassicism

Romanticism

19th century 
Naïve

Nazarene

Realism / Realism

Historicism

Biedermeier

Barbizon school

Pre-Raphaelites

Academic

Hudson River School

Aestheticism

Art pottery

Macchiaioli

Peredvizhniki

Impressionism

Heidelberg School

Decadent

Symbolism

Art Nouveau

Post-Impressionism

Neo-Impressionism

Pointillism

Cloisonnism

Les Nabis

Synthetism

Costumbrismo

20th century 
Arts and Crafts

Incoherents

Fauvism

Die Brücke

Cubism

Expressionism

Neue Künstlervereinigung München

Futurism

Metaphysical art

Rayonism

Der Blaue Reiter

Orphism

Synchromism

Vorticism

Suprematism

Ashcan

Dada

De Stijl

Australian tonalism

Purism

Bauhaus

Kinetic art

New Objectivity

Grosvenor School

Neues Sehen

Surrealism

Neo-Fauvism

Precisionism

Scuola Romana

Art Deco

International Typographic Style

Social realism

Abstract expressionism

Vienna School of Fantastic Realism

Color Field

Lyrical abstraction

Tachisme

COBRA

Action painting

New media art

Letterist International

Pop art

Situationist International

Lettrism

Neo-Dada

Op art

Nouveau réalisme

Art Language

Conceptual art

Land art

Systems art

Video art

Minimalism

Fluxus

Photorealism

Performance art

Installation art

Endurance art

Outsider art

Neo-expressionism

Lowbrow

Young British Artists

Amazonian pop art

21st century 
Art intervention

Hyperrealism

Neo-futurism

Stuckism

Sound art

Superstroke

Superflat

Relational art

Walking art

Related 
Avant-garde

Contemporary art

Feminist art movement (in the US)

Modern art

Modern sculpture

Modernism

Late modernism

Postmodern art

Western painting

List of art movements
 Category:Art movements

Authority control 
BNF: cb11936200g (data)

GND: 4010866-1

LCCN: sh85035374

NKC: ph305399
