"For the Russian fairy tale Father Frost, see Father Frost (fairy tale).

Fictional Christmas character in eastern Slavic cultures

Ded Moroz

Morozko by Ivan Bilibin

Two Ded Morozas with Snegurochka

Ded Moroz (Russian: Дед Мороз, Ded Moroz ; Belarusian: Дзед Мароз, Dzyed Maróz; Ukrainian: Дід Мороз, Did Moróz; Russian diminutive Russian: Дедушка Мороз, Dédushka Moróz; Serbian: Деда мраз / Deda Mraz; Bulgarian: Дядо мраз / Dyado Mraz; Slovene: Dedek Mraz; Macedonian: Дедо мраз / Dedo mraz; Croatian: Djed Mraz; Morozko (Russian: Морозко)) is a legendary figure similar to Father Christmas and Santa Claus who has his roots in Slavic paganism mythology. The tradition of Ded Moroz is mostly spread in East Slavic countries and is an important part of Russian culture. Although at the beginning of the Soviet era communists banned Ded Moroz he soon became an important part of the Soviet culture. The literal translation is "Grandfather Frost".

Ded Moroz is depicted as bringing presents to well-mannered children, often delivering them in person on New Year's Eve.

In East Slavic cultures, Ded Moroz is accompanied by Snegurochka (Russian: Снегурочка, Snegurochka; Ukrainian: Снігуронька, Snihurónka; "Snow Maiden"), his granddaughter and helper, who wears long silver-blue robes and a furry cap or a snowflake-like crown. She is a unique attribute of Ded Moroz, since similar characters in other cultures do not have a female companion.

Ded Moroz wears a heel-length fur coat, a semi-round fur hat, and valenki on his feet. He has a long white beard. He walks with a long magic staff and often rides a troika.

The residence of Ded Moroz in Russia is considered to be the town of Veliky Ustyug, Vologda Oblast. The residence of the Belarusian Dzyed Maroz is said to be in Belavezhskaya Pushcha.

Contents

1 Development of the character

2 In modern Russia

2.1 Variations of Ded Moroz in ethnic minority groups of Russia

2.2 International relations of Ded Moroz

2.3 GLONASS Tracks Ded Moroz

3 Regional differences and controversies

3.1 Armenia

3.2 Azerbaijan

3.3 Belarus

3.4 Bulgaria

3.5 Former Yugoslavia

3.6 Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan

3.7 Mongolia

3.8 Poland

3.9 Romania

3.10 Sakha Republic

3.11 Slovenia

3.12 Tajikistan

3.13 Ukraine

3.14 Uzbekistan

4 See also

5 References

6 External links

Development of the character

Ded Moroz in Veliky Ustyug, Russia

Ded Moroz on a Ukrainian postage stamp with New Year greeting

Snow sculpture of Ded Moroz in Samara

Viktor Vasnetsov: Ded Moroz 1885

Anti-Ded Moroz Soviet propaganda, 1928

The origins of the character of Ded Moroz predates Christianity as a Slavic wizard of winter. According to some sources in Slavic mythology, Ded Moroz, back then also called Morozko or Ded, is a snow demon. However, before the Christianity of Rus' the term demon had no negative connotation. Like with many other mythical figures only over time demons were attributed negative characteristics.

Under the influence of Orthodox traditions, the character of Ded Moroz was transformed. Since the 19th century the attributes and legend of Ded Moroz have been shaped by literary influences. The play Snegurochka by Aleksandr Ostrovsky was influential in this respect, as was Rimsky-Korsakov's Snegurochka with libretto based on the play. By the end of the 19th century Ded Moroz became a popular character.

A man dressed as Ded Moroz in a blue coat

Following the Russian Revolution, Christmas traditions were actively discouraged because they were considered to be "bourgeois and religious". Similarly, in 1928 Ded Moroz was declared "an ally of the priest and kulak". Nevertheless, the image of Ded Moroz took its current form during Soviet times, becoming the main symbol of the New Year's holiday (Novy God) that replaced Christmas. Some Christmas traditions were revived following the famous letter by Pavel Postyshev, published in Pravda on December 28, 1935. Postyshev believed that the origins of the holiday, which were pre-Christian, were less important than the benefits it could bring to Soviet children.

In modern Russia

Vladimir Putin, President of the Russian Federation visiting Ded Moroz' residence in Veliky Ustyug on January 7, 2008

Ded Moroz is very popular in modern Russia. In 1998, the town of Veliky Ustyug in Vologda Oblast, Russia was declared the home of the Russian Ded Moroz by Yury Luzhkov, then Mayor of Moscow. Between 2003 and 2010, the post office in Veliky Ustyug received approximately 2,000,000 letters from within Russia and from all over the world for Ded Moroz. On January 7, 2008, then President Putin of the Russian Federation visited Ded Moroz' residence in the town of Veliky Ustyug as part of the Russian Orthodox Christmas Eve celebration.

The western Santa Claus made inroads in the Russian Federation during the "turbulent" 1990s when Western culture increased its penetration into the post-Soviet Russia. The resurgence of Russia in the early 21st century brought about a renewed emphasis on the basic Slavic character of Ded Moroz. This included the Russian Federation and subordinate governments sponsoring courses about Ded Moroz every December, with the aim of establishing appropriate Slavic norms for Ded Moroz and Snegurochka ("Snow Maiden" - Ded Moroz' granddaughter) roles for the New Year holiday. People playing Ded Moroz and Snegurochka now typically make appearances at children's parties during the winter holiday season, distributing presents and fighting off the wicked witch, Baba Yaga, who children are told wants to steal the gifts.

In November and December 2010, Ded Moroz was one of the candidates in the running for consideration as a mascot for the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia.

Variations of Ded Moroz in ethnic minority groups of Russia

Many ethnic minorities have for linguistic reasons other names for Ded Moroz or even have their own culture-equivalent counterparts to Ded Moroz. For example, in Bashkir Ded Moroz is known as Ҡыш бабай (Qïš babay, literally: "Winter Old Man"), in Tatar it has similar spelling Qış Babay (Кыш бабай) with the same meaning. In Nenets he is known as Yamal Iri ("Grandfather of Yamal"). The Yakut indigenous people have their own counterpart to Ded Moroz, which is called Chys Khaan ("Master of Cold").

International relations of Ded Moroz

Ded Moroz, and on occasion the Belarus Dzied Maroz, are presented in the media as being in on-going détente with various counterparts from other cultures, such as the Estonian Santa Claus (Jõuluvana or "Old man of Christmas"), the Finnish Santa Claus (Joulupukki or "Yule Goat"), and other Santa Claus, Father Christmas, and Saint Nicholas figures. The détente efforts portrayed have included one-on-one meetings, group meetings and friendly competitions, such as the annual November Santa Claus championships of Celle, Germany.

GLONASS Tracks Ded Moroz

In November 2009, for the first time, the Russian Federation offered competition to NORAD Tracks Santa with GLONASS Tracks Ded Moroz, which purports to use GLONASS (GLObal NAvigation Satellite System or "the Russian GPS") to track Ded Moroz on New Year's Eve (according to the Gregorian Calendar).

The Russian-language website provides "real-time tracking" of Ded Moroz, "news" of Ded Moroz throughout the year, a form to send e-mail to Ded Moroz, photos, videos, streaming audio of Russian songs, poems and verses from children's letters to Ded Moroz, information on Veliky Ustyug in Vologda Oblast (considered to be Ded Moroz's hometown) and opportunities to enter competitions and win prizes.

Regional differences and controversies

There are equivalents of Ded Moroz and Snegurochka all over the former USSR, as well as the countries once in the so-called Eastern bloc and in the former Yugoslavia. After the Dissolution of the Soviet Union, some of these countries made efforts to move away from Soviet and Russian heritage toward their own ancient traditions.

Armenia

The Armenian name for Ded Moroz is Dzmer Pap, literally Grandfather Winter. His loyal granddaughter Dzyunanushik, whose name means Snow Sweetie, or Snow Anush (a popular Armenian female name), is another counterpart of Snegurochka. The tradition was set throughout the times of the Russian Empire after the Russo-Persian War (1826-1828), when Eastern Armenia was joined to Russia according to the 1828 Treaty of Turkmenchay.

For almost 160 years of influence Dzmer Pap and Dzyunanushik have hardly changed their appearance or behavior: they come in red, blue or white winter fur coats and, bringing presents to children, expect them to sing songs or recite poems. They are parts of New Year and Christmas matinées and shows in Armenia. In the recent decades well-off parents have developed a tradition to invite Dzmer Pap and Dzyunanushik to their children.

Azerbaijan

In Azerbaijani, Ded Moroz is known as Şaxta Baba ("Grandfather Frost") and his companion Snegurochka is known as Qar Qızı ("Snow Girl"). In the predominantly Muslim but secular country, where Christians are a very small minority, this tradition remains very popular. Şaxta Baba brings gifts to children at New Year celebrations, however Qar Qızı is rarely present at the festivities.

Belarus

Ded Moroz is Dzied Maroz (Belarusian: "Дзед Мароз") in Belarusian language. He is not a historical folkloric Belarusian character, but was a replacement of the local Śviaty Mikałaj – whom Soviet authorities disapproved for its Christian origins.

The official residence of Dzied Maroz in Belarus is declared to be in Bialowieza Forest.

Bulgaria

The Bulgarian name of Santa Claus is Дядо Коледа (Dyado Koleda, Grandfather Koleda), with Dyado Mraz (Дядо Мраз, "Grandfather Frost") being a similar Russian-imported character lacking the Christian connotations and thus popular during Communist rule. However, he has been largely forgotten since 1989, when Dyado Koleda again returned as the more popular figure.

Former Yugoslavia

In socialist Yugoslavia (Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Serbia and Slovenia) the character who was said to bring gifts to children was called "Grandfather Frost" (Bosnian: Djed Mraz or Djeda Mraz; Croatian: Djed Mraz; Macedonian: Дедо Мраз (Dedo Mraz); Montenegrin: Đed Mraz; Serbian: Деда Мраз (Deda Mraz); Slovenian: Dedek Mraz). He was said to bring gifts for the New Year because public celebration of Christmas was frowned upon during communism.

In Croatia after the breakup of Yugoslavia, Djed Mraz was labeled communist creation and Djed Božićnjak (literally: "Grandfather Christmas") was introduced. Attempts were made in the mass media and advertising to replace Djed Mraz with Djed Božićnjak. After 1999 the names of Djed Mraz and Djed Božićnjak became more or less synonymous, including in their use on public television. In some families Djed Mraz is still said to brings gifts at New Year. In Croatia, children also get presents on December 6. Due to historical influence of Austrian culture in parts of Croatia, presents are also said to be brought by a traditional figure called Sveti Nikola ("Saint Nicholas") who closely resembles Djed Mraz or Djed Božićnjak, except for the fact that he is accompanied by Krampus who takes misbehaving children away, another character from Central European folklore. In some religious families, little Jesus (Isusek, Mali Isus, Kriskindl) is said to brings gifts at Christmas instead of Djed Božićnjak. Also, in some parts of Dalmatia the gifts are brought by Sveta Lucija ("Saint Lucy")..

Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan

Ayaz Ata is the Kazakh and Kyrgyz name for Ded Moroz.

Mongolia

Since the introduction and familiarization of Russian culture during the socialist era, Mongolia has been celebrating the New Year's festivities as a formal holiday. "Өвлийн өвгөн" (Grandfather Winter) is the Mongolian equivalent of Ded Moroz, who brings children and adult alike gifts on New Year's Eve.

Poland

While there is no traditional analog of Ded Moroz in Polish folklore, there was an attempt to introduce him as Dziadek Mróz during the communist period. Communists, opposed to religion in general, considered Christmas and traditional Święty Mikołaj (Saint Nicholas) "ideologically hostile". Therefore, propaganda attempted to replace him with Dziadek Mróz. Authorities often insisted on using the figure in schools and preschools during celebrations and events for children. This was also supposed to create an illusion of cultural links with the Soviet Union.

Romania

See also: Moș Gerilă

In 1948, after the Communists gained power in Romania, it was decided that Christmas should not be celebrated. December 25 and December 26 became working days and no official celebrations were to be held. As a replacement for Moş Crăciun (Father Christmas), a new character was introduced, Moş Gerilă (literally "Old Man Frosty", a Romanian language adaptation of the Russian Ded Moroz). He was said to bring gifts to children on December 31.

Officially, the New Year's Day celebrations began on 30 December, which was named the Day of the Republic, since it was the day when King Mihai I of Romania abdicated in 1947.

After the Romanian Revolution of 1989, Moş Gerilă lost his influence, being replaced by Moş Crăciun.

Sakha Republic

Chys Khan is known as the master of cold, accompanied by the snow maiden Khaarchana.

Slovenia

A man dressed as Dedek Mraz in Slovenia.

In Slovenia, the name Ded Moroz was translated from Russian as Dedek Mraz (literally, "Grandpa Frost"). Dedek Mraz is depicted as a slim man wearing a grey leather coat, which has fur inside and is decorated outside, and a round dormouse fur cap. This version of the character is based on traditional imagery, especially as depicted by Maksim Gaspari in images commissioned in 1952. Although the name was translated literally from the Soviet figure, other names for the character were also considered: Sneženi mož ("the Snow Man") and oca Triglav ("Daddy Triglav"). A female figure names babica Zima (Grandma Winter) was also proposed. Initially he was said to live in Siberia, but with the Informbiro crisis and the schism between Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union his home was relocated to Mt. Triglav, Slovenia's (and also Yugoslavia's) highest peak. Public processions featuring the character began in Ljubljana in 1953. The notion of Grandpa Frost was ideologically useful because it served to reorient the December/January holidays away from religion (Saint Nicholas Day and Christmas) and towards the secular New Year. After the ousting of Communism at the beginning of the 1990s, two other "good old men" (as they are currently styled in Slovenian) reappeared in public: Miklavž ("Saint Nicholas") is said to bring presents on December 6, and Božiček ("Christmas man"; usually depicted as Santa Claus) on Christmas Eve. St. Nicholas has had a strong traditional presence in Slovenian ethnic territory and his feast day remained celebrated in family circles throughout the Communist period. Until the late 1940s it was also said in some areas of Slovenia that Christkind (called Jezušček ("little Jesus") or Božiček) brought gifts on Christmas Eve. Slovenian families have different preferences regarding their gift-giver of choice, according to political or religious persuasion. Slovenian popular culture depicts Grandpa Frost, Saint Nicholas and Santa Claus as friends and has also started blending attributes of the characters, for example, mention of Santa's reindeer is sometimes mingled into the Grandpa Frost narrative at public appearances. Due to his non-religious character and strong institutionalization, Grandpa Frost continues to retain a public presence.

Tajikistan

In Tajikistan the tradition of Ded Moroz has continued. In Tajik, Ded Moroz is known as Boboi Barfi ("Grandfather Snow"), and Snegurochka is called "Barfak" ("Snowball").

In 2012, a young man dressed as Ded Moroz was stabbed to death in Dushanbe by a crowd shouting "You infidel!". The murder was motivated by religious hatred, according to the Tajik police.

On 11 December 2013, Saidali Siddiqov, the first deputy head of the Committee for TV and Radio-broadcasting under the Government of Tajikistan, announced in an interview that "Father Frost, his maiden sidekick Snegurochka (Maiden Snow), and New Year’s tree will not appear on the state television this year, because these personages and attributes bear no direct relation to our national traditions, though there is no harm in them". However next day this was denounced, and planned celebrations did include these despite objections of some religious figures.

Ukraine

Since the breakup of the USSR and especially in the recent years, there has been a shift from Ded Moroz, which came to be associated with the Soviet-era heritage, to more traditional Saint Nicholas (Святий Миколай, Sviatyi Mykolai), which used to be more popular in Western Ukraine.  There were rumors that Ded Moroz imagery was discouraged by the authorities due to conflict with Russia. The Ukrainian Ministry of Culture refuted this.

Uzbekistan

In 2012, Uzbekistan, a largely Muslim nation, moved away from celebrating Christmas and its historical characters.

See also

List of Christmas and winter gift-bringers by country – Wikipedia list article

Christmas in Eastern Europe

Father Christmas – Christmas-associated figure originating in England

Sinterklaas – Legendary figure based on Saint Nicholas

Jack Frost – Personification of frost and cold weather

Old Man Winter

Moș Gerilă – Romanian Christmas folkloric character

References

^ Deirdre, Holding (September 2014). Armenia with Nagorno Karabagh : the Bradt travel guide (Fourth ed.). Chalfont St. Peter. p. 96. ISBN 9781841625553. OCLC 883465141.

^ "Snegurochka: The Snow Maiden in Russian Culture by Kerry Kubilius". About.com. Retrieved 2010-11-26.

^ "Snowflake Girl". Retrieved 2017-06-17.

^ a b "Of Russian origin: Ded Moroz". RT.com. Retrieved 2010-11-26.

^ a b c "Ded Moroz, the Russian Santa: Ded Moroz, or 'Grandfather Frost' is Russia's Santa Claus by Kerry Kubilius". About.com. Retrieved 2010-11-26.

^ Dixon-Kennedy, Mike (2 April 1998). Encyclopedia of Russian & Slavic Myth and Legend. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 9781576070635. Retrieved 2 April 2018 – via Google Books.

^ "The main symbol of New Year in Russia – is Father Christmas (Ded Moroz)". Guide For You Tours. Retrieved 2019-02-15.

^ "The main symbol of New Year in Russia – is Father Christmas (Ded Moroz). — Guide For You Tours". Guide For You Tours. Retrieved 2018-08-20.

^ "Christmas Customs in Eastern Europe: Eastern Europe's Traditional Christmas Celebrations by Kerry Kubilius". About.com. Retrieved 2010-11-26.

^ a b (in Russian)Fir Markets

^ a b Karen Petrone, Life Has Become More Joyous, Comrades: Celebrations in the Time of Stalin, Indiana University Press, 200, ISBN 0-253-33768-2, Google Print, p.85

^ "Father Frost and the Snow Maiden deliver Russia's winter warmer, by Helen Womack, 31 December 1996". London: The Independent. 1996-12-31. Retrieved 2010-12-12.

^ a b c "Reveling in Russian Santa's fairytale home, by Phoebe Taplin, 15 Dec 2010". Russia: Beyond the Headlines. 2010-12-15. Retrieved 2010-12-15.

^ Veliky Ustyug page on the site "Small Towns of Russia" (in Russian)

^ http://www.christmasdivision.ru/stati/velikij-ustjug-rodina-deda-moroza Archived 2016-03-17 at the Wayback Machine Veliky Ustyg is the birthplace of Ded Moroz (in Russian)

^ "Veliky Ustyug, the Russian Santa's Home by Kerry Kubilius". About.com. Retrieved 2010-11-27.

^ "Veliky Ustyug - Homeland of Father Frost". Vologda Oblast. Archived from the original on 2010-07-03. Retrieved 2010-11-27.

^ "Putin and his deputy show off Russian Christmas traditions, 7 Jan 2008". Deutsche Presse-Agentur. Archived from the original on 2013-01-28. Retrieved 2010-11-27.

^ "Russia's Grandfather Frost fights the invading Santas, Dec 24, 2000 by Fred Weir". London: The Independent. 2000-12-24. Retrieved 2010-11-27.

^ a b "Meet Russia's Antidote To Santa, Dec 25, 2007 by Dave Grout, CBS News". CBS News. 2007-12-24. Retrieved 2010-11-25.

^ "Video - Meet Russia's Antidote To Santa, Dec 25, 2007 by Dave Grout, CBS News". CBS News. Archived from the original on 2011-07-16. Retrieved 2010-11-25.

^ "Moscow school set to instruct a new generation of Santas, RIA Novosti, Dec 6, 2005". RIA Novosti. Retrieved 2010-11-25.

^ "Father Frost: History". Russian Santas. Archived from the original on 2011-07-15. Retrieved 2010-11-25.

^ a b "Photo Archive". gov.karelia.ru. Retrieved 2 April 2018.

^ "A winter bull". Russia Beyond. 2013-01-02. Retrieved February 25, 2018.

^ "Estonia/Russia: Santa Claus Shakes Hands With Father Frost, Jan 1, 2006". Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty. Retrieved 2010-11-25.

^ "Russian Father Frost expects to celebrate Christmas in London, Nov 24, 2010". Interfax. Retrieved 2010-11-25.

^ "Finnish Santa Claus and Belarusian Father Frost, Nov 22, 2010". Official Website of the Republic of Belarus. Retrieved 2010-11-25.

^ "Ded Maroz ('Father Frost') meets Santa Claus in Turku, Finland, Dec 31, 2008". YouTube. Retrieved 2010-11-25.

^ "Vologda Oblast Press Release: Ded Moroz Presides Over the Annual International Santa Claus Championships of 28–29 November 2009 in Celle, Germany – Nov 27, 2009". Vologda Oblast. Archived from the original on 2011-07-22. Retrieved 2010-11-27.

^ "Vologda Oblast Press Release: Ded Moroz Participates in Annual International Santa Claus Championships of 28–29 November 2008 in Celle, Germany – Nov 27, 2008". Vologda Oblast. Archived from the original on 2011-07-22. Retrieved 2010-11-27.

^ "Santa Claus Championships hit Switzerland and Germany – Dec 3, 2009". China Central Television (CCTV). Retrieved 2010-11-27.

^ "What on earth is happening with "Russia's GPS"?, Dec 1, 2009 by Julia Ioffe". Fortune. Archived from the original on September 13, 2010. Retrieved 2010-11-20.

^ "Official GLONASS Tracks Ded Moroz website" (in Russian). Official GLONASS Tracks Father Frost. Retrieved 2010-11-27.

^ 
 Dowling, Timothy C. (2014). Russia at War: From the Mongol Conquest to Afghanistan, Chechnya, and Beyond . ABC-CLIO. pp. 728–. ISBN 978-1-59884-948-6.

^ a b "Dzied Maroz". On-Line Reference and Information. Archived from the original on July 17, 2011. Retrieved 2010-11-26.

^ a b "Christmas and New Year in Belarus, 13 Dec 2007". Office for a Democratic Belarus. Archived from the original on November 23, 2010. Retrieved 2010-11-26.

^ "Traditions old and new: From Father Frost to Father Christmas, Dec 26, 2005 by Petar Kostadinov". The Sofia Echo. Retrieved 2010-11-26.

^ "BALKANS: Religion Makes a Worrying Call, 11 May 2009". Global Geopoltics Net. Retrieved 2010-11-26.

^ Klobčar, Marija. 2009. Christmas Songs and Constructing Identities. Traditiones 38(1): 173–188, p. 173.

^ Tivodar, Blanka, & Andreja Vezovnik. 2010. Cooking in Socialist Slovenia: Housewives on the Road from a Bright Future to an Idyllic Past. In: Breda Luthar & Maruša Pušnik (eds.), Remembering Utopia: The Culture of Everyday Life in Socialist Yugoslavia, pp. 379–406. Washington, DC: New Academia Publishing, p. 396.

^ "Santa Claus in Croatia: The Croatian Santa Clause Tradition by Kerry Kubilius". About.com. Retrieved 2010-11-26.

^ a b "Croatia Christmas Traditions: Christmas in Croatia by Kerry Kubilius". About.com. Retrieved 2010-11-26.

^ MongolNews.mn. "Нэр нэгтийн чих нэг: ӨВЛИЙН ӨВГӨН (Цан хүүрэгтэй зочид )". mongolnews.mn. Retrieved 2019-12-11.

^ *(in Polish) Dziadek Mróz versus Saint Nicholas, last accessed on 11 May 2006

^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2012-01-07. Retrieved 2012-01-01.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ (in Romanian) Amintiri cu Moş Gerilă ("Memories with Moş Gerilă"), Evenimentul Zilei, 24 December 2005

^ "The Scent of Christmas in Romania, Dec 2006 by Magdalena Chitic". European Youth Voice. Retrieved 2010-11-26.

^ a b c d e "Kot zadnji od decembrskih obdarovalcev je tu dedek Mraz." 2014. 24ur.com (28 December). (in Slovene)

^ "Dobri možje". dedekmraz.talija.com. Retrieved 2 April 2018.

^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2011-11-24. Retrieved 2011-01-04.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ "Slovenia's Christmas Traditions: Christmas in Slovenia by Kerry Kubilius". About.com. Retrieved 2010-11-26.

^ Roman Kozhevnikov (3 January 2012). "'Father Christmas' stabbed to death in Tajikistan". Reuters.

^ Asia-Plus (11 December 2013). "'Tajik official confirms information about banning Father Frost from New Year's broadcasts". Asia-Plus.

^ "В Таджикистане решили не запрещать Деда Мороза и Снегурочку" (retrieved January 3, 2016)

^ "Kiev Brings Back Orthodox Santa Claus Instead of Soviet-Era Father Frost". The Moscow Times. 20 November 2014.

^ "Деда Мороза и Снегурочку в Украине никто не запрещал - Минкульт"

^ "Father Christmas off air in Uzbekistan". BBCNews. 24 December 2012.

External links

 Look up ded moroz in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ded Moroz.

"Just Don't Call Me Santa!"—A history of Ded Maroz in English

"Father Frost, the Red Nose" on Russia Info-Centre

Reveling in Russian Santa’s fairytale home

Home page all of the Ded's Moroz (in Russian)

GLONASS Tracks Ded Moroz (in Russian)

Coat of arms of Ded Moroz (in Russian)

v

t

e

Christmas

Blue Christmas

Christmas Eve

Children's Day

Boxing Day

Nochebuena

Saint Nicholas Day

St. Stephen's Day

Sol Invictus

Yule

In

Christianity 
Biblical Magi
Adoration of the Magi

Adoration of the Shepherds

Advent

Angel Gabriel

Annunciation

Annunciation to the shepherds

Baptism of the Lord

Bethlehem

Christingle

Christmastide

Epiphany

Herod the Great

Jesus

Joseph

Mary

Massacre of the Innocents
flight into Egypt

Nativity Fast

Nativity of Jesus
in art

in later culture

Nativity scene

Saint Nicholas

Star of Bethlehem

Twelfth Night

In folklore

Badalisc

La Befana

Belsnickel

Caganer

Christkind

Ded Moroz

Elves

Father Christmas

Grýla

Jack Frost

Joulupukki

Knecht Ruprecht

Korvatunturi

Krampus

Legend of the Christmas Spider

Mikulás

Miner's figure

Mrs. Claus

Nisse/Tomte

North Pole

Old Man Winter

Olentzero

Père Fouettard

Père Noël

Saint Lucy

Santa's reindeer
Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer

Santa's workshop

Sinterklaas

Tió de Nadal

Vertep

Yule Cat

Yule Lads

Zwarte Piet

Gift-bringers

Saint Nicholas

Santa Claus

List of Christmas gift-bringers by country

Traditions 
Advent calendar

Advent candle

Advent wreath

Boar's Head Feast

Candle arches

Cards

Carols by Candlelight

Cavalcade of Magi

Crackers

Decorations

Events and celebrations

Feast of the Seven Fishes

Flying Santa

Gifts

Google Santa Tracker

Hampers

Las Posadas

Letters

Lights

Lord of Misrule

Markets

Meals and feasts

Moravian star

Nine Lessons and Carols

NORAD Tracks Santa

Nutcrackers
dolls

Ornaments

Parades
list

Piñatas

Pyramids

Räuchermann

Seals

Secret Santa

Spanbaum

Stamps

Stockings

Tree

Twelve Days

Wassailing

Windows

Yule goat

Yule log

By country 
Australia

Denmark

Germany

Hawaii

Hungary

Iceland

Indonesia

Ireland

Mexico

New Zealand

Norway

Philippines

Poland

Romania

Russia

Scotland

Serbia

Sweden

Ukraine

Music 
Carols
list

Hit singles UK

Hit singles US

Music books
Carols for Choirs

The Oxford Book of Carols

The New Oxford Book of Carols

Piae Cantiones

Other media 
In literature
novels

Secular Christmas stories
A Christmas Carol

Films

Poetry
"Old Santeclaus with Much Delight"

"A Visit from St. Nicholas"

Television
specials

Yule Log

In

modern

society 
Advent Conspiracy

Black Friday (partying)

Black Friday (shopping)

Bronner's Christmas Wonderland

Christmas club

Christmas creep

Christmas Day (Trading) Act 2004

Christmas Lectures

Christmas Mountains

Christmas truce

Controversies

Cyber Monday

Economics

Giving Tuesday

Grinch

El Gordo

Holiday season

In July

In August

Leon Day

NBA games

NFL games

Puritan New England

American Civil War

Post-War United States

Running of the Santas

SantaCon

Santa's Candy Castle

Small Business Saturday

Super Saturday

Ugly sweaters

Virginia O'Hanlon

White Christmas

Winter festivals

WWE Tribute to the Troops

Xmas

Food and

drink 
Dinner
Joulupöytä

Julebord

Kūčios

Réveillon

Twelve-dish supper

Smörgåsbord

Wigilia

Sweets
bûche de Noël

Cake

Candy cane

Cookies

Cozonac

Fruitcake

Gingerbread

Kourabiedes

Melomakarono

Mince pie

Pavlova

Pecan pie

Pumpkin pie

Pudding

Szaloncukor

Turrón

Soup
Menudo

Sauce
Cranberry sauce

Beverages
Apple cider

Champurrado

Eggnog

Mulled wine
Smoking Bishop

Ponche crema

Dumpling
Hallaca

Tamale

Meat
Ham

Roast goose

Romeritos

Turkey

Stuffing

 Category

 Christianity portal

 Commons

Authority control 
GND: 119290197

VIAF: 59891099

 WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 59891099
