"For varieties of language, see Dialect. For electrical insulators, see Dielectric.

Discourse method for resolving disagreement by reasoned argument

Dialectic or dialectics (Greek: διαλεκτική, dialektikḗ; related to dialogue), also known as the dialectical method, is at base a discourse between two or more people holding different points of view about a subject but wishing to establish the truth through reasoned methods of argumentation. Dialectic resembles debate, but the concept excludes subjective elements such as emotional appeal and the modern pejorative sense of rhetoric. Dialectic may thus be contrasted with both the eristic, which refers to argument that aims to successfully dispute another's argument (rather than searching for truth), or the didactic method, wherein one side of the conversation teaches the other. Dialectic is alternatively known as minor logic, as opposed to major logic or critique.

Within Hegelianism, the word dialectic has the specialised meaning of a contradiction between ideas that serves as the determining factor in their relationship. Dialectic comprises three stages of development: first, the thesis, a statement of an idea; second, the antithesis, a reaction that contradicts or negates the thesis; and third, the synthesis, a statement through which the differences between the two points are resolved. Dialectical materialism, a theory or set of theories produced mainly by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, adapted the Hegelian dialectic into arguments regarding traditional materialism.

Dialectic tends to imply a process of evolution and so does not naturally fit within formal logic (see logic and dialectic). This process is particularly marked in Hegelian dialectic, and even more so in Marxist dialectic, which may rely on the evolution of ideas over longer time periods in the real world; dialectical logic attempts to address this.

Contents

1 Western dialectical forms

1.1 Classical philosophy

1.1.1 Socratic method

1.1.2 Plato

1.1.3 Aristotle

1.2 Medieval philosophy

1.3 Modern philosophy

1.3.1 Hegelian dialectic

1.3.2 Marxist dialectic

1.3.3 Dialectical naturalism

2 Dialectical theology

3 Legacy

4 Criticisms

5 Formalism

6 See also

7 References

8 Further reading

9 External links

Western dialectical forms

Classical philosophy

In classical philosophy, dialectic (διαλεκτική) is a form of reasoning based upon dialogue of arguments and counter-arguments, advocating propositions (theses) and counter-propositions (antitheses). The outcome of such a dialectic might be the refutation of a relevant proposition, or of a synthesis, or a combination of the opposing assertions, or a qualitative improvement of the dialogue.

Moreover, the term "dialectic" owes much of its prestige to its role in the philosophies of Socrates and Plato, in the Greek Classical period (5th to 4th centuries BCE). Aristotle said that it was the pre-Socratic philosopher Zeno of Elea who invented dialectic, of which the dialogues of Plato are the examples of the Socratic dialectical method.

According to Kant, however, the ancient Greeks used the word "dialectic" to signify the logic of false appearance or semblance. To the Ancients, "it was nothing but the logic of illusion. It was a sophistic art of giving to one's ignorance, indeed even to one's intentional tricks, the outward appearance of truth, by imitating the thorough, accurate method which logic always requires, and by using its topic as a cloak for every empty assertion."

Socratic method

Main article: Socratic method

The Socratic dialogues are a particular form of dialectic known as the method of elenchus (literally, "refutation, scrutiny") whereby a series of questions clarifies a more precise statement of a vague belief, logical consequences of that statement are explored, and a contradiction is discovered. The method is largely destructive, in that false belief is exposed and only constructive in that this exposure may lead to further search for truth. The detection of error does not amount to a proof of the antithesis; for example, a contradiction in the consequences of a definition of piety does not provide a correct definition. The principal aim of Socratic activity may be to improve the soul of the interlocutors, by freeing them from unrecognized errors; or indeed, by teaching them the spirit of inquiry.

In common cases, Socrates used enthymemes as the foundation of his argument.

For example, in the Euthyphro, Socrates asks Euthyphro to provide a definition of piety. Euthyphro replies that the pious is that which is loved by the gods. But, Socrates also has Euthyphro agreeing that the gods are quarrelsome and their quarrels, like human quarrels, concern objects of love or hatred. Therefore, Socrates reasons, at least one thing exists that certain gods love but other gods hate. Again, Euthyphro agrees. Socrates concludes that if Euthyphro's definition of piety is acceptable, then there must exist at least one thing that is both pious and impious (as it is both loved and hated by the gods)—which Euthyphro admits is absurd. Thus, Euthyphro is brought to a realization by this dialectical method that his definition of piety is not sufficiently meaningful.

For example, in Plato's Gorgias, dialectic occurs between Socrates, the Sophist Gorgias, and two men, Polus and Callicles. Because Socrates' ultimate goal was to reach true knowledge, he was even willing to change his own views in order to arrive at the truth. The fundamental goal of dialectic, in this instance, was to establish a precise definition of the subject (in this case, rhetoric) and with the use of argumentation and questioning, make the subject even more precise. In the Gorgias, Socrates reaches the truth by asking a series of questions and in return, receiving short, clear answers.

Plato

See also: Theory of forms

There is another interpretation of dialectic, suggested in The Republic, as a procedure that is both discursive and intuitive. In Platonism and Neoplatonism, dialectic assumes an ontological and metaphysical role in that it becomes the process whereby the intellect passes from sensibles to intelligibles, rising from Idea to Idea until it finally grasps the supreme Idea, the First Principle which is the origin of all. The philosopher is consequently a "dialectician". In this sense, dialectic is a process of enquiry that does away with hypotheses up to the First Principle (Republic, VII, 533 c-d). It slowly embraces the multiplicity in unity. Simon Blackburn writes that the dialectic in this sense is used to understand "the total process of enlightenment, whereby the philosopher is educated so as to achieve knowledge of the supreme good, the Form of the Good".

Aristotle

Aristotle stresses that rhetoric is closely related to dialectic. He offers several formulas to describe this affinity between the two disciplines: first of all, rhetoric is said to be a “counterpart” (antistrophos) to dialectic (Rhet. I.1, 1354a1); (ii) it is also called an “outgrowth” (paraphues ti) of dialectic and the study of character (Rhet. I.2, 1356a25f.); finally, Aristotle says that rhetoric is part of dialectic and resembles it (Rhet. I.2, 1356a30f.). In saying that rhetoric is a counterpart to dialectic, Aristotle obviously alludes to Plato's Gorgias (464bff.), where rhetoric is ironically defined as a counterpart to cookery in the soul. Since, in this passage, Plato uses the word ‘antistrophos’ to designate an analogy, it is likely that Aristotle wants to express a kind of analogy too: what dialectic is for the (private or academic) practice of attacking and maintaining an argument, rhetoric is for the (public) practice of defending oneself or accusing an opponent. The analogy to dialectic has important implications for the status of rhetoric. Plato argued in his Gorgias that rhetoric cannot be an art (technê), since it is not related to a definite subject, while real arts are defined by their specific subjects, as e.g. medicine or shoemaking are defined by their products, i.e., health and shoes.

Medieval philosophy

Logic, which could be considered to include dialectic, was one of the three liberal arts taught in medieval universities as part of the trivium; the other elements were rhetoric and grammar.

Based mainly on Aristotle, the first medieval philosopher to work on dialectics was Boethius (480–524). After him, many scholastic philosophers also made use of dialectics in their works, such as Abelard, William of Sherwood, Garlandus Compotista, Walter Burley, Roger Swyneshed, William of Ockham, and Thomas Aquinas.

This dialectic (a quaestio disputata) was formed as follows:

The question to be determined (“It is asked whether...”);

A provisory answer to the question (“And it seems that...”);

The principal arguments in favor of the provisory answer;

An argument against the provisory answer, traditionally a single argument from authority ("On the contrary...");

The determination of the question after weighing the evidence ("I answer that...");

The replies to each of the initial objections. (“To the first, to the second etc., I answer that...”)

Modern philosophy

The concept of dialectics was given new life by Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (following Johann Gottlieb Fichte), whose dialectically synthetic model of nature and of history made it, as it were, a fundamental aspect of the nature of reality (instead of regarding the contradictions into which dialectics leads as a sign of the sterility of the dialectical method, as Immanuel Kant tended to do in his Critique of Pure Reason). In the mid-19th century, the concept of "dialectic" was appropriated by Karl Marx (see, for example, Das Kapital, published in 1867) and Friedrich Engels and retooled in a dynamic, nonidealistic manner. It would also become a crucial part of later representations of Marxism as a philosophy of dialectical materialism. These representations often contrasted dramatically and led to vigorous debate among different Marxist groupings, leading some prominent Marxists to give up on the idea of dialectics completely.

Hegelian dialectic

"Hegelian dialectic" redirects here. For the Prodigy album, see Hegelian Dialectic (The Book of Revelation).

See also: Dialectical phenomenology and Logical holism

 Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

Hegelianism

Forerunners

Aristotle

Böhme

Spinoza

Rousseau

Kant

Goethe

Fichte

Hölderlin

Schelling

Successors

Feuerbach

Marx

Stirner

Gentile

Lukács

Kojève

Adorno

Habermas

Principal works

The Phenomenology of Spirit

Science of Logic

Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences

Lectures on Aesthetics

Elements of the Philosophy of Right

Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion

Lectures on the Philosophy of History

Lectures on the History of Philosophy

Schools

Absolute idealism

Hegelianism (dialectics)

British idealism

German idealism

Related topics

Right Hegelians

Young Hegelians

Related categories

► Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel

v

t

e

Hegelian dialectic, usually presented in a threefold manner, was stated by Heinrich Moritz Chalybäus as comprising three dialectical stages of development: a thesis, giving rise to its reaction; an antithesis, which contradicts or negates the thesis; and the tension between the two being resolved by means of a synthesis. In more simplistic terms, one can consider it thus: problem → reaction → solution. Although this model is often named after Hegel, he himself never used that specific formulation. Hegel ascribed that terminology to Kant. Carrying on Kant's work, Fichte greatly elaborated on the synthesis model and popularized it.

On the other hand, Hegel did use a three-valued logical model that is very similar to the antithesis model, but Hegel's most usual terms were: Abstract-Negative-Concrete. Hegel used this writing model as a backbone to accompany his points in many of his works.

The formula, thesis-antithesis-synthesis, does not explain why the thesis requires an antithesis. However, the formula, abstract-negative-concrete, suggests a flaw, or perhaps an incompleteness, in any initial thesis—it is too abstract and lacks the negative of trial, error, and experience. For Hegel, the concrete, the synthesis, the absolute, must always pass through the phase of the negative, in the journey to completion, that is, mediation. This is the essence of what is popularly called Hegelian dialectics.

According to the German philosopher Walter Kaufmann:

Fichte introduced into German philosophy the three-step of thesis, antithesis, and synthesis, using these three terms. Schelling took up this terminology. Hegel did not. He never once used these three terms together to designate three stages in an argument or account in any of his books. And they do not help us understand his Phenomenology, his Logic, or his philosophy of history; they impede any open-minded comprehension of what he does by forcing it into a scheme which was available to him and which he deliberately spurned  The mechanical formalism  Hegel derides expressly and at some length in the preface to the Phenomenology.

Kaufmann also cites Hegel's criticism of the triad model commonly misattributed to him, adding that "the only place where Hegel uses the three terms together occurs in his lectures on the history of philosophy, on the last page but one of the sections on Kant—where Hegel roundly reproaches Kant for having 'everywhere posited thesis, antithesis, synthesis'".

To describe the activity of overcoming the negative, Hegel also often used the term Aufhebung, variously translated into English as "sublation" or "overcoming", to conceive of the working of the dialectic. Roughly, the term indicates preserving the useful portion of an idea, thing, society, etc., while moving beyond its limitations. (Jacques Derrida's preferred French translation of the term was relever.)

In the Logic, for instance, Hegel describes a dialectic of existence: first, existence must be posited as pure Being (Sein); but pure Being, upon examination, is found to be indistinguishable from Nothing (Nichts). When it is realized that what is coming into being is, at the same time, also returning to nothing (in life, for example, one's living is also a dying), both Being and Nothing are united as Becoming.

As in the Socratic dialectic, Hegel claimed to proceed by making implicit contradictions explicit: each stage of the process is the product of contradictions inherent or implicit in the preceding stage. For Hegel, the whole of history is one tremendous dialectic, major stages of which chart a progression from self-alienation as slavery to self-unification and realization as the rational constitutional state of free and equal citizens. The Hegelian dialectic cannot be mechanically applied for any chosen thesis. Critics argue that the selection of any antithesis, other than the logical negation of the thesis, is subjective. Then, if the logical negation is used as the antithesis, there is no rigorous way to derive a synthesis. In practice, when an antithesis is selected to suit the user's subjective purpose, the resulting "contradictions" are rhetorical, not logical, and the resulting synthesis is not rigorously defensible against a multitude of other possible syntheses. The problem with the Fichtean "thesis–antithesis–synthesis" model is that it implies that contradictions or negations come from outside of things. Hegel's point is that they are inherent in and internal to things. This conception of dialectics derives ultimately from Heraclitus.

Hegel stated that the purpose of dialectics is "to study things in their own being and movement and thus to demonstrate the finitude of the partial categories of understanding."

One important dialectical principal for Hegel is the transition from quantity to quality, which he terms the Measure. The measure is the qualitative quantum, the quantum is the existence of quantity.

The identity between quantity and quality, which is found in Measure, is at first only implicit, and not yet explicitly realised. In other words, these two categories, which unite in Measure, each claim an independent authority. On the one hand, the quantitative features of existence may be altered, without affecting its quality. On the other hand, this increase and diminution, immaterial though it be, has its limit, by exceeding which the quality suffers change.  But if the quantity present in measure exceeds a certain limit, the quality corresponding to it is also put in abeyance. This however is not a negation of quality altogether, but only of this definite quality, the place of which is at once occupied by another. This process of measure, which appears alternately as a mere change in quantity, and then as a sudden revulsion of quantity into quality, may be envisaged under the figure of a nodal (knotted) line.

As an example, Hegel mentions the states of aggregation of water: "Thus the temperature of water is, in the first place, a point of no consequence in respect of its liquidity: still with the increase or diminution of the temperature of the liquid water, there comes a point where this state of cohesion suffers a qualitative change, and the water is converted into steam or ice". As other examples Hegel mentions the reaching of a point where a single additional grain makes a heap of wheat; or where the bald tail is produced, if we continue plucking out single hairs.

Another important principle for Hegel is the negation of the negation, which he also terms Aufhebung (sublation): Something is only what it is in its relation to another, but by the negation of the negation this something incorporates the other into itself. The dialectical movement involves two moments that negate each other, something and its other. As a result of the negation of the negation, "something becomes its other; this other is itself something; therefore it likewise becomes an other, and so on ad infinitum". Something in its passage into other only joins with itself, it is self-related. In becoming there are two moments: coming-to-be and ceasing-to-be: by sublation, i.e., negation of the negation, being passes over into nothing, it ceases to be, but something new shows up, is coming to be. What is sublated (aufgehoben) on the one hand ceases to be and is put to an end, but on the other hand it is preserved and maintained. In dialectics, a totality transforms itself; it is self-related, then self-forgetful, relieving the original tension.

Marxist dialectic

This section contains too many or overly lengthy quotations for an encyclopedic entry. Please help improve the article by presenting facts as a neutrally worded summary with appropriate citations. Consider transferring direct quotations to Wikiquote. (January 2019)

 Part of a series on

Marxism

Theoretical works

Economic and Philosophic

Manuscripts of 1844

Theses on Feuerbach

The German Ideology

Wage Labour and Capital

The Communist Manifesto

The Eighteenth Brumaire of

Louis Napoleon

Grundrisse der Kritik

der Politischen Ökonomie

A Contribution to the

Critique of Political Economy

Das Kapital

Critique of the Gotha Program

Dialectics of Nature

Philosophy

Economic determinism

Historical materialism

Marx's dialectic

Marx's method

Philosophy of nature

Economics

Capital (accumulation)

Crisis theory

Commodity

Exploitation

Factors of production

Means of labor

Means of production

Mode of production
Asiatic

Capitalist

Socialist

Law of value

Productive forces

Scientific socialism

Surplus product

Surplus value

Value-form

Wage labor

Sociology

Alienation

Base and superstructure

Bourgeoisie

Class

Class consciousness

Class struggle

Classless society

Commodity fetishism

Communist society

Cultural hegemony

Dictatorship of the proletariat

Exploitation

Free association

General intellect

Human nature

Ideology

Immiseration

Lumpenproletariat

Metabolic rift

Proletariat

Private property

Relations of production

Reification

State theory

Social metabolism

Working class

History

Anarchism and Marxism

Philosophy in the Soviet Union

Primitive accumulation

Proletarian revolution

Proletarian internationalism

World revolution

Young Marx

Aspects

Aesthetics

Archaeology

Criminology

Feminism

Film theory

Geography

Historiography

Literary criticism

Marxism and religion

Variants

Analytical

Austro

Budapest School

Classical

Democratic socialism

Eurocommunism

Frankfurt School

Freudian

Hegelian

Humanist

Impossibilism

Instrumental

Libertarian
Autonomism

Council communism

De Leonism

Left communism
Bordigism

Leninism
Marxism–Leninism
Maoism

Trotskyism

Neo-Gramscianism

Neo-

Neue Marx-Lektüre

Open

Orthodox

Political

Post-

Revisionist

Praxis School

Social democracy

Structural

Western

People

Karl Marx

Engels

Bebel

Bernstein

De Leon

Kautsky

Eleanor Marx

Debs

Hardie

Plekhanov

Zetkin

Gorky

Connolly

Lenin

Luxemburg

Liebknecht

Kollontai

Pannekoek

Stalin

Trotsky

Borochov

Lukács

Korsch

Gramsci

Benjamin

Mao

Horkheimer

Ibárruri

Reich

Aragon

Brecht

Marcuse

Fromm

Lefebvre

Adorno

Sartre

Rubel

Beauvoir

Allende

Dunayevskaya

Mills

Hobsbawm

Althusser

Pasolini

Zinn

Miliband

Parenti

Bauman

Guevara

Castro

Debord

Fanon

Harvey

Wolff

Sankara

Žižek

Varoufakis

Ho

Related topics

Critical theory

Criticism of Marxism

Communism

History of communism

Left-wing politics
Old Left

New Left

Social anarchism
Anarcho-communism

Socialism
Libertarian

Revolutionary

Utopian

Related categories

► Karl Marx

Outline

 Communism portal

 Philosophy portal

 Socialism portal

v

t

e

 Part of a series on the

Frankfurt School

Major works

Reason and Revolution

"The Work of Art in the

Age of Mechanical Reproduction"

Eclipse of Reason

Escape from Freedom

Minima Moralia

Eros and Civilization

One-Dimensional Man

Negative Dialectics

The Structural Transformation

of the Public Sphere

The Theory of Communicative Action

Dialectic of Enlightenment

Notable theorists

Marcuse

Adorno

Horkheimer

Benjamin

Fromm

Pollock

Löwenthal

Habermas

Schmidt

Honneth

Kracauer

Kirchheimer

List

Advanced capitalism

Antipositivism

Communicative rationality

Critical theory

Culture industry

Dialectic

Legitimation crisis

Non-identity

Popular culture

Praxis

Privatism

Psychoanalysis

Related topics

Freudo-Marxism

Marxist humanism

Social alienation

 Philosophy portal

 Society portal

v

t

e

Marxist dialectic is a form of Hegelian dialectic which applies to the study of historical materialism. It purports to be a reflection of the real world created by man. Dialectic would thus be a robust method under which one could examine personal, social, and economic behaviors. Marxist dialectic is the core foundation of the philosophy of dialectical materialism, which forms the basis of the ideas behind historical materialism.

Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels proposed that Hegel's dialectic is too abstract:

The mystification which dialectic suffers in Hegel's hands, by no means prevents him from being the first to present its general form of working in a comprehensive and conscious manner. With him it is standing on its head. It must be turned right side up again, if you would discover the rational kernel within the mystical shell.

In contradiction to Hegelian idealism, Marx presented his own dialectic method, which he claims to be "direct opposite" of Hegel's method:

My dialectic method is not only different from the Hegelian, but is its direct opposite. To Hegel, the life-process of the human brain, i.e. the process of thinking, which, under the name of 'the Idea', he even transforms into an independent subject, is the demiurgos of the real world, and the real world is only the external, phenomenal form of 'the Idea'. With me, on the contrary, the ideal is nothing else than the material world reflected by the human mind, and translated into forms of thought.

In Marxism, the dialectical method of historical study became intertwined with historical materialism, the school of thought exemplified by the works of Marx, Engels, and Vladimir Lenin. In the USSR, under Joseph Stalin, Marxist dialectics became "diamat" (short for dialectical materialism), a theory emphasizing the primacy of the material way of life; social "praxis" over all forms of social consciousness; and the secondary, dependent character of the "ideal". The term "dialectical materialism" was coined by the 19th-century social theorist Joseph Dietzgen who used the theory to explain the nature of socialism and social development. The original populariser of Marxism in Russia, Georgi Plekhanov used the terms "dialectical materialism" and "historical materialism" interchangeably. For Lenin, the primary feature of Marx's "dialectical materialism" (Lenin's term) was its application of materialist philosophy to history and social sciences. Lenin's main input in the philosophy of dialectical materialism was his theory of reflection, which presented human consciousness as a dynamic reflection of the objective material world that fully shapes its contents and structure. Later, Stalin's works on the subject established a rigid and formalistic division of Marxist–Leninist theory in the dialectical materialism and historical materialism parts. While the first was supposed to be the key method and theory of the philosophy of nature, the second was the Soviet version of the philosophy of history.

A dialectical method was fundamental to Marxist politics, e.g., the works of Karl Korsch, Georg Lukács and certain members of the Frankfurt School. Soviet academics, notably Evald Ilyenkov and Zaid Orudzhev, continued pursuing unorthodox philosophic study of Marxist dialectics; likewise in the West, notably the philosopher Bertell Ollman at New York University.

Friedrich Engels proposed that Nature is dialectical, thus, in Anti-Dühring he said that the negation of negation is:

A very simple process, which is taking place everywhere and every day, which any child can understand as soon as it is stripped of the veil of mystery in which it was enveloped by the old idealist philosophy.

In Dialectics of Nature, Engels said:

Probably the same gentlemen who up to now have decried the transformation of quantity into quality as mysticism and incomprehensible transcendentalism will now declare that it is indeed something quite self-evident, trivial, and commonplace, which they have long employed, and so they have been taught nothing new. But to have formulated for the first time in its universally valid form a general law of development of Nature, society, and thought, will always remain an act of historic importance.

Marxist dialectics is exemplified in Das Kapital (Capital), which outlines two central theories: (i) surplus value and (ii) the materialist conception of history; Marx explains dialectical materialism:

In its rational form, it is a scandal and abomination to bourgeoisdom and its doctrinaire professors, because it includes in its comprehension an affirmative recognition of the existing state of things, at the same time, also, the recognition of the negation of that state, of its inevitable breaking up; because it regards every historically developed social form as in fluid movement, and therefore takes into account its transient nature not less than its momentary existence; because it lets nothing impose upon it, and is in its essence critical and revolutionary.

Class struggle is the primary contradiction to be resolved by Marxist dialectics, because of its central role in the social and political lives of a society. Nonetheless, Marx and Marxists developed the concept of class struggle to comprehend the dialectical contradictions between mental and manual labor, and between town and country. Hence, philosophic contradiction is central to the development of dialectics – the progress from quantity to quality, the acceleration of gradual social change; the negation of the initial development of the status quo; the negation of that negation; and the high-level recurrence of features of the original status quo. In the USSR, Progress Publishers issued anthologies of dialectical materialism by Lenin, wherein he also quotes Marx and Engels:

As the most comprehensive and profound doctrine of development, and the richest in content, Hegelian dialectics was considered by Marx and Engels the greatest achievement of classical German philosophy.... "The great basic thought", Engels writes, "that the world is not to be comprehended as a complex of ready-made things, but as a complex of processes, in which the things, apparently stable no less than their mind images in our heads, the concepts, go through an uninterrupted change of coming into being and passing away... this great fundamental thought has, especially since the time of Hegel, so thoroughly permeated ordinary consciousness that, in its generality, it is now scarcely ever contradicted.
But, to acknowledge this fundamental thought in words, and to apply it in reality in detail to each domain of investigation, are two different things.... For dialectical philosophy nothing is final, absolute, sacred. It reveals the transitory character of everything and in everything; nothing can endure before it, except the uninterrupted process of becoming and of passing away, of endless ascendancy from the lower to the higher. And dialectical philosophy, itself, is nothing more than the mere reflection of this process in the thinking brain." Thus, according to Marx, dialectics is "the science of the general laws of motion both of the external world and of human thought".

Lenin describes his dialectical understanding of the concept of development:

A development that repeats, as it were, stages that have already been passed, but repeats them in a different way, on a higher basis ("the negation of the negation"), a development, so to speak, that proceeds in spirals, not in a straight line; a development by leaps, catastrophes, and revolutions; "breaks in continuity"; the transformation of quantity into quality; inner impulses towards development, imparted by the contradiction and conflict of the various forces and tendencies acting on a given body, or within a given phenomenon, or within a given society; the interdependence and the closest and indissoluble connection between all aspects of any phenomenon (history constantly revealing ever new aspects), a connection that provides a uniform, and universal process of motion, one that follows definite laws – these are some of the features of dialectics as a doctrine of development that is richer than the conventional one.

Dialectical naturalism

Dialectical naturalism is a term coined by American philosopher Murray Bookchin to describe the philosophical underpinnings of the political program of social ecology. Dialectical naturalism explores the complex interrelationship between social problems, and the direct consequences they have on the ecological impact of human society. Bookchin offered dialectical naturalism as a contrast to what he saw as the "empyrean, basically antinaturalistic dialectical idealism" of Hegel, and "the wooden, often scientistic dialectical materialism of orthodox Marxists".

Dialectical theology

Neo-orthodoxy, in Europe also known as theology of crisis and dialectical theology, is an approach to theology in Protestantism that was developed in the aftermath of the First World War (1914–1918). It is characterized as a reaction against doctrines of 19th-century liberal theology and a more positive reevaluation of the teachings of the Reformation, much of which had been in decline (especially in western Europe) since the late 18th century. It is primarily associated with two Swiss professors and pastors, Karl Barth (1886–1968) and Emil Brunner (1899–1966), even though Barth himself expressed his unease in the use of the term.

In dialectical theology the difference and opposition between God and human beings is stressed in such a way that all human attempts at overcoming this opposition through moral, religious or philosophical idealism must be characterized as 'sin'. In the death of Christ humanity is negated and overcome, but this judgment also points forwards to the resurrection in which humanity is reestablished in Christ. For Barth this meant that only through God's 'no' to everything human can his 'yes' be perceived. Applied to traditional themes of Protestant theology, such as double predestination, this means that election and reprobation cannot be viewed as a quantitative limitation of God's action. Rather it must be seen as its "qualitative definition". As Christ bore the rejection as well as the election of God for all humanity, every person is subject to both aspects of God's double predestination.

Legacy

Dialectics has become central to continental philosophy, but it plays no part in Anglo-American philosophy. In other words, on the continent of Europe, dialectics has entered intellectual culture as what might be called a legitimate part of thought and philosophy, whereas in America and Britain, the dialectic plays no discernible part in the intellectual culture, which instead tends toward positivism. A prime example of the European tradition is Jean-Paul Sartre's Critique of Dialectical Reason, which is very different from the works of Popper, whose philosophy was for a time highly influential in the UK where he lived (see below). Sartre states:

Existentialism, like Marxism, addresses itself to experience in order to discover there concrete syntheses. It can conceive of these syntheses only within a moving, dialectical totalisation, which is nothing else but history or—from the strictly cultural point of view adopted here—'philosophy-becoming-the world'.

Criticisms

Karl Popper has attacked the dialectic repeatedly. In 1937, he wrote and delivered a paper entitled "What Is Dialectic?" in which he attacked the dialectical method for its willingness "to put up with contradictions". Popper concluded the essay with these words: "The whole development of dialectic should be a warning against the dangers inherent in philosophical system-building. It should remind us that philosophy should not be made a basis for any sort of scientific system and that philosophers should be much more modest in their claims. One task which they can fulfill quite usefully is the study of the critical methods of science" (Ibid., p. 335).

In chapter 12 of volume 2 of The Open Society and Its Enemies (1944; 5th rev. ed., 1966), Popper unleashed a famous attack on Hegelian dialectics in which he held that Hegel's thought (unjustly in the view of some philosophers, such as Walter Kaufmann) was to some degree responsible for facilitating the rise of fascism in Europe by encouraging and justifying irrationalism. In section 17 of his 1961 "addenda" to The Open Society, entitled "Facts, Standards and Truth: A Further Criticism of Relativism", Popper refused to moderate his criticism of the Hegelian dialectic, arguing that it "played a major role in the downfall of the liberal movement in Germany  by contributing to historicism and to an identification of might and right, encouraged totalitarian modes of thought.   undermined and eventually lowered the traditional standards of intellectual responsibility and honesty".

The philosopher of science and physicist Mario Bunge repeatedly criticized Hegelian and Marxian dialectics, calling them "fuzzy and remote from science" and a "disastrous legacy". He concluded: "The so-called laws of dialectics, such as formulated by Engels (1940, 1954) and Lenin (1947, 1981), are false insofar as they are intelligible."

Formalism

Main article: Logic and dialectic

In the past few decades, European and American logicians have attempted to provide mathematical foundations for dialectical logic or argument.:201–372 There had been pre-formal and partially-formal treatises on argument and dialectic, from authors such as Stephen Toulmin (The Uses of Argument),:203–256 Nicholas Rescher (Dialectics),:330–336 and van Eemeren and Grootendorst (pragma-dialectics).:517–614 One can include the communities of informal logic and paraconsistent logic.:373–424 However, building on theories of defeasible reasoning (see John L. Pollock), systems have been built that define well-formedness of arguments, rules governing the process of introducing arguments based on fixed assumptions, and rules for shifting burden. Many of these logics appear in the special area of artificial intelligence and law, though the computer scientists' interest in formalizing dialectic originates in a desire to build decision support and computer-supported collaborative work systems.

See also

Philosophy portal

Psychology portal

Dialectical behavioral therapy

Dialectical research

Dialogic

Doublethink

False dilemma

Reflective equilibrium

Relational dialectics

Thesis, antithesis, synthesis

Unity of opposites

Universal dialectic

References

^ see Gorgias, 449B: "Socrates: Would you be willing then, Gorgias, to continue the discussion as we are now doing , by way of question and answer, and to put off to another occasion the (emotional) speeches  that  Polus began?"

^ Corbett, Edward P. J.; Robert J. Connors (1999). Classical Rhetoric For the Modern Student (4th ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. pp. 1, 18. ISBN 9780195115420.

^ Ayer, A. J., & O'Grady, J. (1992). A Dictionary of Philosophical Quotations. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishers. p. 484.

^ McTaggart, J. M. E. (1964). A commentary on Hegel's logic. New York: Russell & Russell. p. 11

^ Diogenes Laërtius, IX 25ff and VIII 57.

^ Critique of Pure Reason, A 61

^ "Elenchus - Wiktionary".

^ https://open.conted.ox.ac.uk/sites/open.conted.ox.ac.uk/files/resources/Create%20Document/PLA_HO3_0.pdf

^ Popper, K. (1962) The Open Society and its Enemies, Volume 1, London, Routledge, p. 133.

^ Reale, Giovanni. (1990), History of Ancient Philosophy, 5 vols, trans. by John R. Catan, Albany: State University of New York, vol 2, p. 150

^ Blackburn, Simon. 1996. The Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford

^ Rapp (2010). Aristotle's Rhetoric. Retrieved from http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/aristotle-rhetoric/

^ Abelson, P. (1965). The seven liberal arts; a study in mediæval culture. New York: Russell & Russell. Page 82.

^ Hyman, A., & Walsh, J. J. (1983). Philosophy in the Middle Ages: the Christian, Islamic, and Jewish traditions. Indianapolis: Hackett Pub. Co. Page 164.

^ Adler, Mortimer Jerome (2000). "Dialectic". Routledge. Page 4. ISBN 0-415-22550-7

^ Herbermann, C. G. (1913). The Catholic encyclopedia: an international work of reference on the constitution, doctrine, and history of the Catholic church. New York: The Encyclopedia press, inc. Page 760–764.

^ From topic to tale: logic and narrativity in the Middle Ages, by Eugene Vance, p.43-45

^ "Catholic Encyclopedia: Peter Abelard". Newadvent.org. 1907-03-01. Retrieved 2011-11-03.

^ William of Sherwood's Introduction to logic, by Norman Kretzmann, p.69-102

^ A History of Twelfth-Century Western Philosophy, by Peter Dronke, p.198

^ Medieval literary politics: shapes of ideology, by Sheila Delany, p.11

^ "Catholic Encyclopedia: St. Thomas Aquinas". Newadvent.org. 1907-03-01. Retrieved 2015-10-20.

^ Nicholson, J. A. (1950). Philosophy of religion. New York: Ronald Press Co. Page 108.

^ Kant, I., Guyer, P., & Wood, A. W. (2003). Critique of pure reason. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Page 495.

^ Henri Lefebvre's "humanist" dialectical materialism (Dialectical Materialism ) was composed to directly challenge Joseph Stalin's own dogmatic text on dialectical materialism.

^ See for example the work of Louis Althusser in France and Galvano Della Volpe in Italy in the mid-20th century.

^ Historische Entwicklung der spekulativen Philosophie von Kant bis Hegel, Dresden-Leipzig (1837), p. 367 of the fourth edition (1848).

^ The Accessible Hegel by Michael Allen Fox. Prometheus Books. 2005. p. 43. Also see Hegel's preface to the Phenomenology of Spirit, trans. A. V. Miller (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1977), secs. 50, 51, pp. 29, 30.

^ See for a discussion of the historical development of the triad. Charles Edward Andrew Lincoln IV, Hegelian Dialectical Analysis of U.S. Voting Laws, 42 U. Dayton L. Rev. 87 (2017).

^ Hegel: A Reinterpretation, 1966, Anchor Books, p. 154)

^ G. E. Mueller (June 1958), "The Hegel Legend of 'Thesis-Antithesis-Synthesis", 166ff

^ Hegel, Werke, ed. Glockner, XIX, 610

^ See 'La différance' in: Margins of Philosophy. Alan Bass, translator. University of Chicago Books. 1982. p. 19, fn 23.

^ Hegel. "Section in question from Hegel's Science of Logic". Marxists.org. Retrieved 2011-11-03.

^ Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich. 1874. The Logic. Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences. 2nd Edition. London: Oxford University Press. Note to §81

^ Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich. 1874. The Logic. Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences. 2nd Edition. London: Oxford University Press. §§107–111

^ Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich. 1874. The Logic. Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences. 2nd Edition. London: Oxford University Press. §§108–109

^ Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich. 1874. The Logic. Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences. 2nd Edition. London: Oxford University Press. §108

^ Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich. 1874. The Logic. Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences. 2nd Edition. London: Oxford University Press. §93

^ Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich. 1874. The Logic. Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical Sciences. 2nd Edition. London: Oxford University Press. §95

^ Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich. 1812. Hegel's Science of Logic. London. Allen & Unwin. §§176–179.

^ Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich. 1812. Hegel's Science of Logic. London. Allen & Unwin. §185.

^ Marx, Karl (1873) Capital Afterword to the Second German Edition, Vol. I 

^ Marx, Karl. "Afterword (Second German Ed.)". Capital. 1: 14. Retrieved 28 December 2014.

^ Engels, Frederick, (1877) Anti-Dühring,Part I: Philosophy, XIII. Dialectics. Negation of the Negation. 

^ "Engels, Frederick, (1883) Dialectics of Nature:II. Dialectics". Marxists.org. Retrieved 2011-11-03.

^ Marx, Karl, (1873) Capital Vol. I, Afterword to the Second German Edition.

^ a b Lenin, V. I., On the Question of Dialectics: A Collection, pp. 7–9. Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1980.

^ a b "Original Britinnica online". Retrieved 2008-07-26.

^ a b "Britannica Encyclopedia (online)". Retrieved 2008-07-26.

^ "Merriam-Webster Dictionary(online)". Retrieved 2008-07-26.

^ "American Heritage Dictionary (online)". Archived from the original on 2005-05-10. Retrieved 2008-07-26.

^ See Church Dogmatics III/3, xii.

^ Karl Barth, The Epistle to the Romans (1933), p. 346

^ Jean-Paul Sartre. "The Search for Method (1st part) Sartre, 1960, in Existentialism from Dostoyevsky to Sartre, transl. Hazel Barnes, Vintage Books". Marxists.org. Retrieved 2011-11-03.

^ Karl Popper,Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientific Knowledge , p. 316.

^ Walter Kaufmann. "kaufmann". Marxists.org. Retrieved 2011-11-03.

^ Karl Popper,The Open Society and Its Enemies, 5th rev. ed., vol. 2 , p. 395

^ Bunge, Mario Augusto (1981). "A critique of dialectics". Scientific materialism. Episteme. 9. Dordrecht; Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers. pp. 41–63. doi:10.1007/978-94-009-8517-9_4. ISBN 978-9027713049. OCLC 7596139.

^ a b Bunge, Mario Augusto (2012). Evaluating philosophies. Boston studies in the philosophy of science. 295. New York: Springer-Verlag. pp. 84–85. doi:10.1007/978-94-007-4408-0. ISBN 9789400744073. OCLC 806947226.

^ a b c d e Eemeren, Frans H. van; Garssen, Bart; Krabbe, Erik C. W.; Snoeck Henkemans, A. Francisca; Verheij, Bart; Wagemans, Jean H. M. (2014). Handbook of argumentation theory. New York: Springer-Verlag. doi:10.1007/978-90-481-9473-5. ISBN 9789048194728. OCLC 871004444.

^ For surveys of work in this area see, for example: Chesñevar, Carlos Iván; Maguitman, Ana Gabriela; Loui, Ronald Prescott (December 2000). "Logical models of argument". ACM Computing Surveys. 32 (4): 337–383. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.702.8325. doi:10.1145/371578.371581. And: Prakken, Henry; Vreeswijk, Gerard (2005). "Logics for defeasible argumentation". In Gabbay, Dov M.; Guenthner, Franz (eds.). Handbook of philosophical logic. 4 (2nd ed.). Dordrecht; Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.295.2649. doi:10.1007/978-94-017-0456-4_3. ISBN 9789048158775.

Further reading

McKeon, Richard (October 1954). "Dialectic and Political Thought and Action". Ethics. 65 (1): 1–33. doi:10.1086/290973. JSTOR 2378780. The essay contains three parts: (1) a brief history of dialectic, designed to focus on these questions by tracing the evolution of various trends of dialectical method in the light of the development of alternative methods; (2) a statement of the nature and varieties of dialectic, designed to bring out differences of methods and to indicate the possibility of common conceptions and common aims; and (3) an examination of the problems of common understanding and common action posed by the difference of dialectical and nondialectical methods of thought today.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Postan, Michael M. (April 1962). "Function and Dialectic in Economic History". The Economic History Review. 14 (3): 397–407. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0289.1962.tb00058.x. JSTOR 2591884. The trouble about the dialectic is not that it is wholly inapplicable to history, but that it is so frequently applied to fields in which it happens to be least useful. If function and dialectic are to be reconciled and allowed their proper place in historical work, it will perhaps be necessary to move a stage beyond the philosophical position which Marx took up in the 1840s. Having put the dialectic on its head, and made it materialist, Marx has directed it into regions to which this posture is unsuited. If we complete the somersault and put the dialectic on its feet again, we might thereby return it to where it belongs.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Rescher, Nicholas (2007). Dialectics: A Classical Approach to Inquiry. Frankfurt; New Brunswick: Ontos Verlag. ISBN 9783938793763. OCLC 185032382.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link) A broad survey of various conceptions of "dialectic", including disputational, cognitive, methodological, ontological, and philosophical.

Spranzi, Marta (2011). The Art of Dialectic between Dialogue and Rhetoric: The Aristotelian Tradition. Controversies. 9. Amsterdam; Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company. doi:10.1075/cvs.9. ISBN 9789027218896. OCLC 704557514. This book reconstructs the tradition of dialectic from Aristotle's Topics, its founding text, up to its 'renaissance' in 16th century Italy, and focuses on the role of dialectic in the production of knowledge.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

External links

 Wikiquote has quotations related to: Dialectic

 Look up dialectic in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

David Walls, Dialectical Social Science

Dialectics for Kids

v:Dialectic algorithm – An algorithm based on the principles of classical dialectics

v

t

e

Philosophy

Branches

Traditional 
Metaphysics
Ontology

Epistemology

Logic

Ethics

Aesthetics

Philosophy of 
Action

Art
Culture

Design

Music

Film

Business

Color

Cosmos

Dialogue

Education

Environment

Futility

Happiness

Healthcare

History

Human nature

Humor

Feminism

Language

Life

Literature

Mathematics

Mind
Pain

Psychology

Philosophy of psychiatry

Philosophy of perception

Philosophy

Religion

Science
Physics

Chemistry

Biology

Geography

Sexuality

Social science
Culture

Economics

Justice

Law

Politics

Society

Space and time

Sport

Technology
Artificial intelligence

Computer science

Engineering

Information

War

Schools of thought

By era 
Ancient

Western
Medieval

Renaissance

Early modern

Modern

Contemporary

Ancient

Chinese 
Agriculturalism

Confucianism

Legalism

Logicians

Mohism

Chinese naturalism

Neotaoism

Taoism

Yangism

Chan

Greco-Roman 
Aristotelianism

Atomism

Cynicism

Cyrenaics

Eleatics

Eretrian school

Epicureanism

Hermeneutics

Ionian
Ephesian

Milesian

Megarian school

Neoplatonism

Peripatetic

Platonism

Pluralism

Presocratic

Pyrrhonism

Pythagoreanism

Neopythagoreanism

Sophistic

Stoicism

Indian 
Hindu

Samkhya

Nyaya

Vaisheshika

Yoga

Mīmāṃsā

Ājīvika

Ajñana

Cārvāka

Jain
Anekantavada

Syādvāda

Buddhist
Śūnyatā

Madhyamaka

Yogacara

Sautrāntika

Svatantrika

Persian 
Mazdakism

Mithraism

Zoroastrianism

Zurvanism

Medieval

European 
Christian

\tAugustinianism

Scholasticism

Thomism

Scotism

Occamism

Renaissance humanism

East Asian 
Korean Confucianism

Edo neo-Confucianism

Neo-Confucianism

Indian 
Vedanta
Acintya bheda abheda

Advaita

Bhedabheda

Dvaita

Nimbarka Sampradaya

Shuddhadvaita

Vishishtadvaita

Navya-Nyāya

Islamic 
Averroism

Avicennism

Illuminationism

ʿIlm al-Kalām

Sufi

Jewish 
Judeo-Islamic

Modern

People 
Cartesianism

Kantianism

Neo-Kantianism

Hegelianism

Marxism

Spinozism

0 
Anarchism

Classical Realism

Liberalism

Collectivism

Conservatism

Determinism

Dualism

Empiricism

Existentialism

Foundationalism

Historicism

Holism

Humanism
Anti-

Idealism
Absolute

British

German

Objective

Subjective

Transcendental

Individualism

Kokugaku

Materialism

Modernism

Monism

Naturalism

Natural law

Nihilism

New Confucianism

Neo-scholasticism

Pragmatism

Phenomenology

Positivism

Reductionism

Rationalism

Social contract

Socialism

Transcendentalism

Utilitarianism

Contemporary

Analytic 
Applied ethics

Analytic feminism

Analytical Marxism

Communitarianism

Consequentialism

Critical rationalism

Experimental philosophy

Falsificationism

Foundationalism / Coherentism

Generative linguistics

Internalism and externalism

Logical positivism

Legal positivism

Normative ethics

Meta-ethics

Moral realism

Quinean naturalism

Ordinary language philosophy

Postanalytic philosophy

Quietism

Rawlsian

Reformed epistemology

Systemics

Scientism

Scientific realism

Scientific skepticism

Transactionalism

Contemporary utilitarianism

Vienna Circle

Wittgensteinian

Continental 
Critical theory

Deconstruction

Existentialism

Feminist

Frankfurt School

New Historicism

Hermeneutics

Neo-Marxism

Phenomenology

Posthumanism

Postmodernism

Post-structuralism

Social constructionism

Structuralism

Western Marxism

Other 
Kyoto School

Objectivism

Postcritique

Russian cosmism

more...

Positions

Aesthetics 
Formalism

Institutionalism

Aesthetic response

Ethics 
Consequentialism

Deontology

Virtue

Free will 
Compatibilism

Determinism
Hard

Incompatibilism
Hard

Libertarianism

Metaphysics 
Atomism

Dualism

Idealism

Monism

Naturalism

Realism

Epistemology 
Empiricism

Fideism

Naturalism

Particularism

Rationalism

Skepticism

Solipsism

Mind 
Behaviorism

Emergentism

Eliminativism

Epiphenomenalism

Functionalism

Objectivism

Subjectivism

Normativity 
Absolutism

Particularism

Relativism

Nihilism

Skepticism

Universalism

Ontology 
Action

Event

Process

Reality 
Anti-realism

Conceptualism

Idealism

Materialism

Naturalism

Nominalism

Physicalism

Realism

By region

Related lists

Miscellaneous

By region 
African

Ethiopian

Amerindian

Aztec

Eastern

Chinese

Egyptian

Indian

Indonesian

Iranian

Japanese

Korean

Pakistani

Vietnamese

Western

American

Australian

British

Czech

Danish

French

German

Greek

Italian

Polish

Romanian

Russian

Slovene

Spanish

Turkish

Lists 
Outline

Index

Years

Problems

Schools

Glossary

Philosophers

Movements

Publications

Miscellaneous 
Natural law

Sage

Theoretical philosophy / Practical philosophy

Women in philosophy

 Portal

 Category

 Book

Authority control 
GND: 4012058-2

NDL: 00560606
