"Group of people from one state present in another state to represent the sending state

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Diplomatic mission" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (June 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Spanish embassy to the Holy See and the Sovereign Military Order of Malta in Rome

Norwegian embassy to the United States, in Washington D.C.

Multiple embassies in one location: The embassies of Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden in a joint compound in Berlin, Germany.

A diplomatic mission or foreign mission is a group of people from one state or an organization present in another state to represent the sending state or organization officially in the receiving state. In practice, the phrase diplomatic mission usually denotes the resident mission, namely the embassy, which is the main office of a country's diplomatic representatives to another country; this is usually, but not necessarily, in the receiving state's capital city. Consulates, on the other hand, are smaller diplomatic missions which are normally located in major cities of the receiving state (but can be located in the capital, usually when the sending country has no embassy in the receiving state). As well as being a diplomatic mission to the country in which it is situated, it may also be a non-resident permanent mission to one or more other countries. There are thus resident and non-resident embassies.

Contents

1 Terminology

2 Extraterritoriality

3 Role

4 Multiple missions in a city

5 Non-diplomatic offices

6 See also

7 Notes and references

8 External links

Terminology

A country may have several different types of diplomatic missions in another country.

An embassy is a diplomatic mission generally located in the capital city of another country which offers a full range of services, including consular services.

A high commission is an embassy of a Commonwealth country located in another Commonwealth country.

A permanent mission is a diplomatic mission to a major international organization.

A consulate general is a diplomatic mission located in a major city, usually other than the capital city, which provides a full range of consular services.

A consulate is a diplomatic mission that is similar to a consulate general, but may not provide a full range of services.

A legation was a diplomatic representative office of lower rank than an embassy. Where an embassy was headed by an ambassador, a legation was headed by a minister. Ambassadors outranked ministers and had precedence at official events. Legations were originally the most common form of diplomatic mission, but they fell out of favor after World War II and were upgraded to embassies.

A consulate headed by an Honorary Consul is a diplomatic mission headed by an Honorary Consul which provides only a limited range of services.

The head of an embassy is known as an ambassador or high commissioner. The term embassy is commonly used also as a section of a building in which the work of the diplomatic mission is carried out, but, strictly speaking, it is the diplomatic delegation itself that is the embassy, while the office space and the diplomatic work done is called the chancery. Therefore, the embassy operates in the chancery.

The members of a diplomatic mission can reside within or outside the building that holds the mission's chancery, and their private residences enjoy the same rights as the premises of the mission as regards inviolability and protection.

All missions to the United Nations are known simply as permanent missions, while EU member states' missions to the European Union are known as permanent representations, and the head of such a mission is typically both a permanent representative and an ambassador. European Union missions abroad are known as EU delegations. Some countries have more particular naming for their missions and staff: a Vatican mission is headed by a nuncio (Latin for "envoy") and consequently known as an apostolic nunciature. Under the rule of Muammar Gaddafi, Libya's missions used the name people's bureau, headed by a secretary.

Missions between Commonwealth countries are known as high commissions, and their heads are high commissioners. Generally speaking, ambassadors and high commissioners are regarded as equivalent in status and function, and embassies and high commissions are both deemed to be diplomatic missions.

In the past, a diplomatic mission headed by a lower-ranking official (an envoy or minister resident) was known as a legation. Since the ranks of envoy and minister resident are effectively obsolete, the designation of legation is no longer used today. (See diplomatic rank.)

A consulate is similar to, but not the same as a diplomatic office, but with focus on dealing with individual persons and businesses, as defined by the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations. A consulate or consulate general is generally a representative of the embassy in locales outside of the capital city. For instance, the Philippines has its Embassy of the Philippines in Washington, D.C., but also maintains seven consulates-general and four consulates elsewhere in the US. The person in charge of a consulate or consulate-general is known as a consul or consul-general, respectively. Similar services may also be provided at the embassy (to serve the region of the capital) in what is normally called a consular section.

In cases of dispute, it is common for a country to recall its head of mission as a sign of its displeasure. This is less drastic than cutting diplomatic relations completely, and the mission will still continue operating more or less normally, but it will now be headed by a chargé d'affaires (usually the deputy chief of mission) who may have limited powers. A chargé d'affaires ad interim also heads the mission during the interim between the end of one chief of mission's term and the beginning of another.

Extraterritoriality

Seal of a diplomatic corps

Contrary to popular belief, most diplomatic missions do not enjoy full extraterritorial status and – in those cases – are not sovereign territory of the represented state. Rather, the premises of diplomatic missions usually remain under the jurisdiction of the host state while being afforded special privileges (such as immunity from most local laws) by the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations. Diplomats themselves still retain full diplomatic immunity, and (as an adherent to the Vienna Convention) the host country may not enter the premises of the mission without permission of the represented country, even to put out a fire. International rules designate an attack on an embassy as an attack on the country it represents. The term "extraterritoriality" is often applied to diplomatic missions, but normally only in this broader sense.

As the host country may not enter the representing country's embassy without permission, embassies are sometimes used by refugees escaping from either the host country or a third country. For example, North Korean nationals, who would be arrested and deported from China upon discovery, have sought sanctuary at various third-country embassies in China. Once inside the embassy, diplomatic channels can be used to solve the issue and send the refugees to another country. See the list of people who took refuge in a diplomatic mission for a list of some notable cases.

Notable violations of embassy extraterritoriality include repeated invasions of the British Embassy, Beijing (1967), the hostage crisis at the American embassy in Tehran, Iran (1979–1981), and the Japanese embassy hostage crisis at the ambassador's residence in Lima, Peru (1996-1997).

Role

Embassy of Nicaragua in Washington, D.C..

The Vienna Convention states:

The functions of a diplomatic mission consist, inter alia, in representing the sending State in the receiving State; protecting in the receiving State the interests of the sending State and of its nationals, within the limits permitted by international law; negotiating with the Government of the receiving State; ascertaining by all lawful means conditions and developments in the receiving State, and reporting thereon to the Government of the sending State; promoting friendly relations between the sending State and the receiving State, and developing their economic, cultural and scientific relations.

Diplomatic missions between members of the British Commonwealth of Nations are not called embassies, but high commissions, for Commonwealth nations share a special diplomatic relationship. It is generally expected that an embassy of a Commonwealth country in a non-Commonwealth country will do its best to provide diplomatic services to citizens from other Commonwealth countries if the citizen's country does not have an embassy in that country. Canadian and Australian nationals enjoy even greater cooperation between their respective consular services, as outlined in the Canada-Australia Consular Services Sharing Agreement. The same kind of procedure is also followed multilaterally by the member states of the European Union (EU). European citizens in need of consular help in a country without diplomatic or consular representation of their own country may turn to any consular or diplomatic mission of another EU member state.

The rights and immunities (such as diplomatic immunity) of diplomatic missions are codified in the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations.

Multiple missions in a city

Some cities may host more than one mission from the same country. An example is Rome, where many states maintain missions to Italy and another to the Holy See. It is not customary for these missions to share premises nor diplomatic personnel. At present, only the Iraqi missions to Italy and the Holy See share premises; however, two ambassadors are appointed, one to each country. In the case of the UN's Food Agencies, the Head of Mission to the Italian Republic is usually accredited as permanent representative. The United States maintains a separate United States Mission to the UN Agencies in Rome, whose head is the United States Ambassador to the United Nations Agencies for Food and Agriculture. Kolkata in India hosts two Bangladeshi Deputy High Commissions, one at Park Circus and another, opened later, at Mirza Galib Street. This was done to reduce overcrowding inside the Deputy High Commission. Both the Deputy High Commissions issue Bangladeshi visas.

Non-diplomatic offices

Main article: De facto embassy

Governments of states not recognized by the receiving state and of territories that make no claim to be sovereign states may set up offices abroad that do not have official diplomatic status as defined by the Vienna Convention. Examples are the Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Offices that represent the government of the Republic of China; Somaliland's Representative Offices in London, Addis Ababa, Rome, and Washington, D.C.; the Hong Kong Economic and Trade Offices that represent the government of that territory. Such offices assume some of the non-diplomatic functions of diplomatic posts, such as promoting trade interests and providing assistance to its citizens and residents. They are nevertheless not diplomatic missions, their personnel are not diplomats and do not have diplomatic visas, although there may be legislation providing for personal immunities and tax privileges, as in the case of the Hong Kong offices in London and Toronto, for example.

See also

Politics portal

International relations

Diplomacy

Embassy chapel

Embassy Row, Washington, D.C.

List of attacks on diplomatic missions

List of countries by number of diplomatic missions

Lists of diplomatic missions

List of people who took refuge in a diplomatic mission

Paradiplomacy

Notes and references

^ "What is a Foreign Mission /Chancery?". www.state.gov. Retrieved 2017-08-25.

^ Tom Nierop, Systems and Regions in Global Politics (Wiley, John and Sons 1994 ISBN 978-0-471-94942-8), p. 67.

^ "The Russian Federation has diplomatic relations with a total of 187 countries, but some of them – mainly for financial reasons – maintain non-resident embassies in other countries", International Affairs, issues 4–6 (Znanye Pub. House, 2006), p. 78

^ "Of Chile's 109 foreign diplomatic missions in 1988, no fewer than 31 were on a non-residential basis, while 17 of the 63 missions in Santiago were non resident" (Deon Geldenhuys, Isolated States: A Comparative Analysis (University of Cambridge 1990 ISBN 0-521-40268-9), p. 158).

^ "America's diplomatic mission to (Saudi Arabia) was changed from non-resident to permanent Minister in Jeddah" (Fahad M. Al-Nafjan, The Origins of Saudi-American Relations, page not numbered).

^ "Types of Diplomatic Missions". e Diplomat. 2016.

^ "1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, article 30" (PDF).

^ a b Sidhur Andrews (1 Jun 2007). Introduction To Tourism And Hospitality Industry. Tata McGraw-Hill Education. p. 33.

^ Nutt, Jim S. "Diplomatic and Consular Representations".

^ "Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, "What does the work of a High Commissioner involve? (PDF).

^ 'Laws and Rules Regarding Extraterritoriality' on integrity-legal.com: "There is a common misconception that Embassies and Consulates have extraterritoriality. As anecdotal evidence of this misconception, people will often say things like, 'the US Embassy sits upon United States soil.' For the most part, this is not the case as extraterritoriality is not conferred upon an Embassy or Consulate, but in some situations extraterritoriality may be created by Treaty".

^ "What is a U.S. Embassy?". diplomacy.state.gov. Archived from the original on 2018-05-10. Retrieved 2014-01-06.

^ "Sir Ray Whitney". The Daily Telegraph. London. 15 August 2012. Retrieved 17 August 2015. Red Guards scaled the British mission's wall as diplomats watched the Ealing comedy Two-Way Stretch. They retreated to an inner room without switching off the projector, pushing a piano across the door as the mob broke windows and began climbing in. Whitney and his colleagues retreated again to the embassy's secure zone, with heavily barred windows. The Chinese set fire to the mission, then used a battering ram on the steel emergency door.

^ "Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relationships, article 3" (PDF).

External links

 Look up embassy in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Diplomatic missions.

 Diplomatic missions travel guide from Wikivoyage

Embassies and consulates around the world

Embassies and Consulates Search Directory

What is the difference between an Embassy and a Consulate?

v

t

e

Diplomacy and diplomats

Roles

Diplomatic

leader titles

Multilateral 
Permanent representative
United Nations

Ambassador-at-large

Resident representative

Bilateral-national 
Ambassador
High commissioner

Nuncio

Chargé d'affaires

Head of mission

Deputy chief of mission

Bilateral-subnational 
Consul

Bilateral-insular 
Resident
Resident commissioner

Envoy

Agent-general

By portfolio (Attaché) 
Agricultural attaché

Chargé de mission

Conseiller chargé des investissements

Cultural attaché

Military attaché
Air attaché

Science attaché

Trade commissioner

Other roles 
Diplomatic courier
Queen's Messenger

Foreign minister

Classification 
Diplomatic rank

Offices 
Apostolic Nunciature

Consular corps

Consulate

De facto embassy

Diplomatic corps
African Diplomatic Corps

Diplomatic mission

High commission

Legation

Protecting power

Exclusive mandate

Types 
Caviar diplomacy

Checkbook diplomacy

Coercive diplomacy

Commercial diplomacy

Cultural diplomacy

Culinary diplomacy

Defence diplomacy

Debt-trap diplomacy

Digital diplomacy

Dollar diplomacy

Freelance diplomacy

Full spectrum diplomacy

Guerrilla diplomacy

Gunboat diplomacy

Hostage diplomacy

Medical diplomacy

New diplomacy

Panda diplomacy

Paradiplomacy

Pilgrimage diplomacy

Ping-pong diplomacy

Preventive diplomacy

Public diplomacy

Shuttle diplomacy

Stadium diplomacy

Topics 
Appeasement

Consular assistance

Consular immunity

Diplomatic accreditation

Diplomatic bag

Diplomatic cable

Diplomatic credentials

Diplomatic history

Diplomatic illness

Diplomatic immunity

Diplomatic law

Diplomatic rank

Diplomatic service

Diplomatic uniform

Protocol

Persona non grata

Documents 
Exequatur

Letter of credence

Letter of protest

Other topics 
Development aid
Agencies

Parliamentary delegation

Summit (meeting)

Twin towns and sister cities

 Category

 Commons
