"American professional school of music

Eastman School of Music

University of Rochester Eastman at night

Type Private

Established 1921

Location Rochester

, New York

, USA

Campus Urban

Website www.esm.rochester.edu

Location in New York

Show map of New York

Eastman School of Music (the United States)

Show map of the United States

The Eastman School of Music is the professional school of music of the University of Rochester in Rochester, New York. It was established in 1921 by industrialist and philanthropist George Eastman.

It offers Bachelor of Music (B.M.) degrees, Master of Arts (M.A.) degrees, Master of Music (M.M.) degrees, Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) degrees, and Doctor of Musical Arts (D.M.A.) degrees in many musical fields. The school also awards a "Performer's Certificate" or "Artist's Diploma". In 2015, there were more than 900 students enrolled in the collegiate division of the Eastman School (approximately 500 undergraduate and 400 graduate students). Students came from almost every state of the United States, with approximately 25% foreign students. Each year approximately 2000 students apply (1000 undergraduates and 1000 graduates). The acceptance rate was 13% in 2011 and about 1,000 students (ranging in age from 16 years to over 80 years of age) are enrolled in the Eastman School’s Community Music School.

Contents

1 History

2 Campus and facilities

3 Degrees offered

4 Faculty and alumni

4.1 Directors and deans

4.2 Notable teachers

4.3 Notable alumni

5 Institute for Music Leadership

6 See also

7 References

8 External links

History

Alfred Klingenberg, a Norwegian pianist, was the school's first director, serving from 1921 to 1923. He was succeeded by composer Howard Hanson in 1924, who had an enormous impact on the development of the school, including influencing the creation the first Doctor of Musical Arts degree in the United States, and holding his post for four decades and continuing his involvement at Eastman after his retirement. Since the founding of the Eastman School of Music in 1921, the school has been directed by six men. After a one-year interim under Acting Director Raymond Wilson, the young American composer and conductor Howard Hanson was appointed director of the school in 1924. Dr. Hanson is credited for transforming the Eastman School into a top school. Upon his retirement in 1964, after serving as director of the school for 40 years, Hanson was succeeded by conductor Walter Hendl.

Hendl served as director from 1964 to 1972, and was then succeeded by pianist and musicologist Robert Freeman who served from 1972 to 1996. Associate Director Daniel Patrylak served as the acting director from the time of Mr. Hendl’s resignation (May 1972) until Robert Freeman assumed the position in July 1973. Following the resignation of Robert Freeman in 1996, James Undercofler was then appointed Director and Dean of the Eastman School, and held that position until he resigned in 2006 to accept the position of C.E.O. and President of the Philadelphia Orchestra. Jamal Rossi, an Eastman alumnus, was appointed Interim Dean of the Eastman School in April 2006. On May 21, 2007, composer/conductor Douglas Lowry, formerly the dean of the University of Cincinnati College-Conservatory of Music, was appointed Dean of the Eastman School, to begin serving in 2007. Following Lowry's death in 2013, Rossi was appointed Dean.

Campus and facilities

Kilbourn Hall

The Eastman School occupies parts of five buildings in downtown Rochester, New York. The main hall includes the renovated 3,094-seat Eastman Theater, the 455-seat Kilbourn Hall, the 222-seat Hatch Recital Hall, and offices for faculty.

The Eastman Theatre opened in 1922 as a center for music, dance, and silent film with orchestral and organ accompaniment. Today, the 3,094-seat theatre is the primary concert hall for the Eastman School's larger ensembles, including its orchestras, wind ensembles, jazz ensembles, and chorale. Also, the Eastman Opera Theatre presents fully staged operatic productions in the theatre each spring. It also is the principal performance venue for the Rochester Philharmonic Orchestra. A $5 million renovation of the theatre was completed in 2004. The theatre is located at 60 Gibbs Street, on the corner of Main and Gibbs Streets. Due to a $10 million donation by Eastman Kodak Inc. in April 2008, the Eastman Theatre was officially renamed "Kodak Hall at Eastman Theatre" upon the renovation's completion in 2010.

The Sibley Music Library—the largest academic music library in North America—is located across the street from the main hall. Hiram Watson Sibley founded the library in 1904 using the fortune he made as first president of Western Union. It moved to its current location in 1989, and occupies 45,000 square feet (4,200 m2) on the 2nd, 3rd and 4th floors of the Miller Center, formerly known as Eastman Place. The Sibley Music Library currently holds almost 750,000 items, ranging from 11th century codices to the latest compositions and recordings. Considered among its jewels are the original drafts of Debussy's impressionistic masterpiece, "La Mer."

The Student Living Center, which is located at 100 Gibbs Street, is the dormitory building of the Eastman School of Music. In 1991, the new building was opened at the corner of Main and Gibbs Streets, replacing the University Avenue dormitories built nearly 70 years earlier. It is a four-story quadrangle and 14-story tower surrounding a landscaped inner courtyard, and contains its own dining hall. The majority of students enrolled in the undergraduate program live on campus in this building.

Degrees offered

The school offers Bachelor of Music (B.M.) degrees, Master of Arts (M.A.) degrees, Master of Music (M.M.) degrees, Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) degrees, and Doctor of Musical Arts (D.M.A.) degrees in many musical fields. The school also awards a "Performer's Certificate" or "Artist's Diploma" to students who demonstrate exceptionally outstanding performance ability. The Institute for Music Leadership, which was formed in 2001, offers a variety of diploma programs designed to educate and give students the skills and experience necessary to meet the demands of performance and education in today’s changing musical world. In 2018, The Institute for Music Leadership created a Master of Arts degree in Music Leadership, which is designed for musicians who seek to lead traditional and/or non-traditional musical arts organizations. This new degree program combines intense classroom study, courses from Eastman’s rich performance and scholarly offerings, and hands-on experiences through internships and mentorships.

Faculty and alumni

Main article: List of Eastman School of Music people

Eastman alumni include singer Renée Fleming, Canadian Brass co-founder Charles Daellenbach, cellist Robert deMaine, drummer Steve Gadd, flugelhornist Chuck Mangione, author and journalist Michael Walsh, trumpeter Allen Vizzutti, scholar Horace Clarence Boyer and composers Maria Schneider and Cardon V. Burnham. Current faculty include musicians and pedagogues like the Ying Quartet, Katherine Ciesinski and Paul O'Dette.

Directors and deans

Alfred Klingenberg (Director, 1921–1923)

Raymond Wilson (Acting Director, 1923–1924)

Howard Hanson (Director, 1924–1964)

Walter Hendl (Director, 1964–1972)

Daniel Patrylak (Acting Director, 1972–1973)

Robert Freeman (Director, 1973–1996)

James Undercofler (Acting Director, 1996–1997; Director, 1997–2006)

Jamal Rossi (Acting Director, 2006–2007; Acting Dean, 2013)

Douglas Lowry (Dean, 2007–2013)

Jamal Rossi (Dean, 2014–present)

Notable teachers

Samuel Adler, composition

Bonita Boyd, flute

Katherine Ciesinski, voice

David Craighead, organ

Robert De Cormier, choral conductor

Jan De Gaetani, voice

Leonardo De Lorenzo, flute

David Effron, orchestral conductor

Frank Glazer, piano

Harold Gleason, organ

Nicholas Goluses, guitar

Anthony Dean Griffey, voice

Arthur Hartmann, violin

Stanley Hasty, clarinet

David Higgs, organ

Mark Kellogg, euphonium & trombone

Henry Klumpenhouwer, music theory

Alexander Kobrin, piano

Oleh Krysa, violin

W. Peter Kurau, horn

Jon Manasse, clarinet

Chuck Mangione, jazz ensemble

John Marcellus, trombone

Emory Remington, trombone

Mendi Rodan, orchestral conductor

Carlos Sanchez-Gutierrez, composition

Joseph Schwantner, composition

Marion Weed, voice

Rayburn Wright, jazz and contemporary media

Zvi Zeitlin, violin

Notable alumni

Sasami Ashworth, singer

Roger Bobo, tubist

Bonita Boyd, flutist

Horace Clarence Boyer, scholar

Angelo Badalamenti, film and television composer

Jeff Briggs, video game developer

Cardon V. Burnham, composer

Ron Carter, bassist

Alexander Courage, film composer

Michael Patrick Coyle, composer, producer

Charles Daellenbach, co-founder of Canadian Brass

David Daniels, conductor and author

Robert deMaine, cellist

Doriot Anthony Dwyer, flutist

Frederick Fennell, band conductor

David Finck, jazz bassist

Pamela Fleming, trumpeter, composer

Renée Fleming, singer

Steve Gadd, drummer

Ayşedeniz Gökçin, pianist

Michael Isaacson, Jewish music composer

Tony Levin, bassist

Scott Lindroth, composer

Bob Ludwig, mastering engineer

Chuck Mangione, flugelhornist

Mitch Miller, oboist, conductor, record company executive

Kim Scharnberg, composer, arranger, conductor, record producer

Maria Schneider, composer

Jeff Tyzik, jazz trumpeter

Allen Vizzutti, trumpeter

George Vosburgh, trumpeter

Michael Walsh, author and journalist

Leehom Wang, singer

William Warfield, singer

Alec Wilder, composer

Institute for Music Leadership

The Institute for Music Leadership (IML) was created to engage musicians in new ways and challenge them to think more broadly about music, its role, and their role in society. It serves as a center for the creation and implementation of new ideas related to music leadership, for Eastman students, alumni, and practicing musicians at all stages of their careers. The goals of the IML reflect the expansion of Eastman's role as an innovator and a standard bearer in professional development. The IML consists of five areas: M.A. in Music Leadership, Careers and Professional Development, Catherine Filene Shouse Arts Leadership Program (ALP), Center for Music Innovation and Engagement (CMIE), The Orchestra Musician Forum (OMF) and its website Polyphonic.org.

The IML offers online courses and speed lessons:

Interactive music theory classroom: This course teaches the basics of pitch, scales, rhythm and harmony and analysis of large symphonic works. Taught by Dr. Steven Laitz, this course provides live feedback, help sessions and tutorials. This course is completely online and students work on assignments over the course of a week.

Graduate music theory review: This course reviews undergraduate theory in preparation for graduate exams and classes and takes three and six weeks. It includes conceptual presentations and demonstrations, written and analytical exercises drawn from the literature, and skill development through singing, listening, and playing.

Music theory fundamentals in four weeks: This online course prepares first-year music majors for music theory placement exams. In addition to the presentation of basic music theory concepts and terminology, it includes over 200 sets of writing, playing, listening, singing, and conducting exercises. These lessons provide a transition between high school and college-level academics. The course can be completed in four to six weeks.

Speed lessons: These video lessons cover the standard orchestral repertoire for different instruments. They are taught by Eastman faculty members with demonstrations from their students. They include tips on what audition committees listen for, and on what technical challenges to watch out for.

See also

List of concert halls

References

^ Pratt, Waldo Selden (1920-01-01). Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians: Being the Sixth Volume of the Complete Work. American supplement. Macmillan Company.

^ Cattell, James McKeen (1919-01-01). School and Society. Society for the Advancement of Education.

^ "Almanac: The birth of Kodak". Sunday Morning. CBS Interactive. Retrieved 30 June 2014.

^ Latimer, Marvin E. (2010). "The Nation's First D.M.A. in Choral Music: History, Structure, and Pedagogical Implications". Journal of Historical Research in Music Education. 32 (1): 19–36. doi:10.1177/153660061003200103. ISSN 1536-6006. JSTOR 20789877.

^ "Conductor, Composer Douglas Lowry Named Dean of Eastman School of Music". Eastman School of Music.

^ "Concert to spotlight centuries of music". NewsOK.com. 2009-09-20.

^ "eTheory LIVE: Interactive Music Theory Classroom".

^ "eTheory: Graduate Music Theory Review".

^ "eTheory: Music Theory Fundamentals in 4 weeks".

^ "Products - IML – Store".

External links

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Eastman School of Music.

Official website

v

t

e

University of Rochester

Academics 
College of Arts, Sciences, and Engineering

Eastman School of Music

Margaret Warner Graduate School of Education and Human Development

School of Medicine and Dentistry

School of Nursing

Simon Business School

The Institute of Optics

Campuses and locations 
River Campus

University of Rochester Medical Center

Eastman Campus

South Campus

Rush Rhees Library

Memorial Art Gallery

George Eastman Museum

Eastman Theatre

Sibley Music Library

University of Rochester Arboretum

Research facilities 
C. E. K. Mees Observatory

Laboratory for Laser Energetics

University of Rochester Medical Center

Golisano Children's Hospital

Strong Memorial Hospital

v

t

e

City of Rochester, New York

History - Nathaniel Rochester - Other notable residents - List of mayors

Transportation 
Rochester-Genesee Regional Transportation Authority

Greater Rochester International Airport

Rochester Amtrak Station

Erie Canal

Douglass-Anthony Bridge

Veterans Memorial Bridge

Former
Rochester Subway
Aqueduct

Lehigh Valley Railroad Station

Erie Railroad Depot

Spirit of Ontario I

Grand View Beach Railway

Neighborhoods 
Downtown

Charlotte

19th Ward (Arvine Heights

Chili–West)

Browncroft

Corn Hill

South Wedge
Linden–South

Maplewood

East End

Eastman Business Park

North Winton

City Hall Historic District

High Falls
State Street

Brown's Race Historic District

14621 Neighborhood

Parks and

landmarks 
Mount Hope Cemetery

Highland Park

Durand Eastman Park

Genesee Valley Park

Maplewood Park

Seneca Park Zoo

George Eastman Museum

Susan B. Anthony House

Rundel Memorial Library

Federal Building/City Hall

Powers Building

Blue Cross Arena

Frontier Field

Capelli Sport Stadium

Sibley's, Lindsay and Curr Building

First Federal Plaza

Legacy Tower

Kodak Tower

Times Square Building

Five Star Bank Plaza

Xerox Tower

Tower 280 (Midtown Tower)

The Metropolitan

Entertainment 
Sports in Rochester

Strong National Museum of Play

Rochester Museum and Science Center

Memorial Art Gallery

Rochester Contemporary Art Center

Little Theatre

Eastman Theatre

Rochester Philharmonic Orchestra

Water Street Music Hall

Rochester Lilac Festival

Rochester International Film Festival

High Falls Film Festival

Rochester International Jazz Festival

Geva Theatre Center

Food 
Nick Tahou Hots

Zweigle's
White hot

Abbott's Frozen Custard

Bill Gray's/Tom Wahl's

DiBella's

Wegmans

Genesee Brewing Company

Research and

education 
University of Rochester
Eastman School of Music

Medical Center

Rochester Institute of Technology
Center for Urban Entrepreneurship

Rochester City School District

Rochester Academy Charter School

Aquinas Institute

Monroe Community College

Rochester Area Colleges

Notable companies 
Hickey Freeman

Bausch Lomb

Eastman Kodak

Paychex

Xerox

French's

Greenlight Networks

Rochester Products (defunct)

Midtown Plaza (defunct)
McCurdy's

B. Forman Co.

Sibley's (defunct)

Harts Local Grocers (defunct)

Rochester Telephone Corporation (defunct)

Lawyers Cooperative Pub. Co. (defunct)

Other topics 
Media in Rochester

Police

Tallest buildings

Rochester Metro Area - Monroe County - Western New York - Finger Lakes - State of New York

Coordinates: 43°9′27.63″N 77°36′5.18″W / 43.1576750°N 77.6014389°W / 43.1576750; -77.6014389

Authority control 
BNF: cb13903120r (data)

GND: 1040062-X

ISNI: 0000 0001 2189 390X

LCCN: n81032860

MusicBrainz: 59d22ef5-acb6-493e-bd5b-66862acb6ed1

SUDOC: 13530654X

VIAF: 154776910

 WorldCat Identities: lccn-n81032860
