This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Egyptian revolution of 1952" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (February 2008) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Egyptian Revolution of 1952

The leaders of the Revolution, Mohammed Naguib (left) and Gamal Abdel Nasser (right) in a Cadillac

Date 23 July 1952

Location Egypt

Result 
End of rule of the Muhammad Ali dynasty

Establishment of the Republic of Egypt

End of British occupation of Egypt

Beginning of the Nasser era

Revolutionary wave across the Arab world

Beginning of the Arab Cold War

Belligerents

 Kingdom of Egypt

Supported by:

United Kingdom 
 Free Officers Movement

Supported by:

United States

USSR

Commanders and leaders

 Farouk

Ahmed Naguib el-Hilaly 
 Mohammed Naguib

Gamal Abdel Nasser

Anwar Sadat

Khaled Mohieddin

Abdel Latif Boghdady

Abdel Hakim Amer

Gamal Salem

Salah Salem

Zakaria Mohieddin

Hussein el-Shafei

Hassan Ibrahim

Kamal el-Din Hussein

Abdel Moneim Amin

Part of a series on the

History of Egypt

 Prehistoric Egypt pre–3150 BC

Ancient Egypt

Early Dynastic Period 3150–2686 BC

Old Kingdom 2686–2181 BC

1st Intermediate Period 2181–2055 BC

Middle Kingdom 2055–1650 BC

2nd Intermediate Period 1650–1550 BC

New Kingdom 1550–1069 BC

3rd Intermediate Period 1069–664 BC

Late Period 664–332 BC

Greco-Roman Egypt

Argead and Ptolemaic dynasties 332–30 BC

Roman and Byzantine Egypt 30 BC–641 AD

Sasanian Egypt 619–629

Medieval Egypt

Rashidun Egypt 641–661

Umayyad Egypt 661–750

Abbasid Egypt 750–935

Tulunid dynasty 868–905

Ikhshidid dynasty 935–969

Fatimid dynasty 969–1171

Ayyubid dynasty 1171–1250

Mamluk dynasties 1250–1517

Early modern Egypt

Ottoman Egypt 1517–1867

French occupation 1798–1801

Muhammad Ali dynasty 1805–1953

Khedivate of Egypt 1867–1914

Late Modern Egypt

British occupation 1882–1922

Sultanate of Egypt 1914–1922

Kingdom of Egypt 1922–1953

Republic 1953–present

 Egypt portal

v

t

e

The Egyptian revolution of 1952 (Arabic: ثورة 23 يوليو 1952‎), also known as the 1952 Coup d'état (Arabic: إنقلاب 23 يوليو 1952‎) or 23 July revolution, began on 23 July 1952, by the Free Officers Movement, a group of army officers led by Mohammed Naguib and Gamal Abdel Nasser. The revolution was initially aimed at overthrowing King Farouk.

However, the movement had more political ambitions, and soon moved to abolish the constitutional monarchy and aristocracy of Egypt and Sudan, establish a republic, end the British occupation of the country, and secure the independence of Sudan (previously governed as an Anglo-Egyptian condominium). The revolutionary government adopted a staunchly nationalist, anti-imperialist agenda, which came to be expressed chiefly through Arab nationalism, and international non-alignment.

The revolution was faced with immediate threats from Western imperial powers, particularly the United Kingdom, which had occupied Egypt since 1882, and France, both of whom were wary of rising nationalist sentiment in territories under their control throughout Africa and the Arab world. The ongoing state of war with Israel also posed a serious challenge, as the Free Officers increased Egypt's already strong support of the Palestinians. These two issues conflated four years after the revolution when Egypt was invaded by Britain, France, and Israel in the Suez Crisis of 1956. Despite enormous military losses, the war was seen as a political victory for Egypt, especially as it left the Suez Canal in uncontested Egyptian control for the first time since 1875, erasing what was seen as a mark of national humiliation. This strengthened the appeal of the revolution in other Arab and African countries.

Wholesale agrarian reform, and huge industrialisation programmes were initiated in the first decade and half of the revolution, leading to an unprecedented period of infrastructure building, and urbanisation. By the 1960s, Arab socialism had become a dominant theme, transforming Egypt into a centrally planned economy. Official fear of a Western-sponsored counter-revolution, domestic religious extremism, potential communist infiltration, and the conflict with Israel were all cited as reasons compelling severe and longstanding restrictions on political opposition, and the prohibition of a multi-party system. These restrictions on political activity would remain in place until the presidency of Anwar Sadat from 1970 onwards, during which many of the policies of the revolution were scaled back or reversed.

The early successes of the revolution encouraged numerous other nationalist movements in other Arab, and African countries, such as Algeria where there were anti-colonial rebellions against European empires. It also inspired the toppling of existing pro-Western monarchies and governments in the region and the continent.

The revolution is commemorated each year on 23 July.

Contents

1 Causes

2 Prelude

3 Military coup

3.1 Declaration of revolution

4 Consolidation

4.1 1954

4.2 1956

5 Commemoration

6 See also

7 References

8 External links

Causes

In 1882, British forces intervened in Egypt during the Anglo-Egyptian War. In 1888 at the Convention of Constantinople, Britain won the right to protect the Suez Canal with military force, giving Britain a base to dominate Egyptian politics. Though nominally still an Ottoman vassal, Egypt became a British protectorate. After World War I, Britain placed a reliable member of Muhammad Ali's dynasty on the throne and declared Egypt a protectorate. During World War II, Egypt was a major Allied base for the North African campaign. After the war, British policy continued to focus on control of the Suez Canal, which was vital for imperial trade.

However, during World War II, Egyptian nationalists within the armed forces gained influence. The 1948 Arab–Israeli War humiliated these nationalists, who blamed the British-backed king, King Farouk. The loss of the 1948 war with Israel led to the Free Officers' accusations of corruption towards the King and his court and the promotion of that feeling among the Egyptian people.

The Free Officers Movement (or sometimes referred to as the Young Officers Movement) was formed by a group of reform-minded officers which, backed by the Soviet Union and the United States coalesced around a young officer named Gamal Abdel Nasser. They used an army general, Muhammad Naguib, as its head to show their seriousness and attract more army followers.

In the warning that General Naguib conveyed to King Farouk on 26 July upon the king's abdication, he provided a summary of the reasons for the Coup:

In view of what the country has suffered in the recent past, the complete vacuity prevailing in all corners as a result of your bad behavior, your toying with the constitution, and your disdain for the wants of the people, no one rests assured of life, livelihood, and honor. Egypt's reputation among the peoples of the world has been debased as a result of your excesses in these areas to the extent that traitors and bribe-takers find protection beneath your shadow in addition to security, excessive wealth, and many extravagances at the expense of the hungry and impoverished people. You manifested this during and after the Palestine War in the corrupt arms scandals and your open interference in the courts to try to falsify the facts of the case, thus shaking faith in justice. Therefore, the army, representing the power of the people, has empowered me to demand that Your Majesty abdicate the throne to His Highness Crown Prince Ahmed Fuad, provided that this is accomplished at the fixed time of 12 o'clock noon today (Saturday, 26 July 1952, the 4th of Zul Qa'ada, 1371), and that you depart the country before 6 o'clock in the evening of the same day. The army places upon Your Majesty the burden of everything that may result from your failure to abdicate according to the wishes of the people.

The Egyptian monarchy was seen as both corrupt and pro-British, with its lavish lifestyle that seemed provocative to the free officers movement who lived in poverty. Its policies completed the image of the Egyptian government being a puppet-figure in the hands of the British government. Promoting the feeling of corruption of several Egyptian institutions such as the police, the palace and even the political parties by the free officers. Despite allegations of anti-British sentiment, a CIA document dated 23 July 1952 stated that the dissatisfaction within the army over corruption in high command began in 1948 after the discovery of an arms scandal during the Palestine conflict. It's important to note that the document does not specifically list a reasoning of an arms scandal, yet that becomes a most logical theory. The loss of the 1948 war with Israel led to the free officers' blame of the King and their promotion of that feeling among the Egyptian people. Tensions between the military and the monarchy resulted in the removal and arrest of Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces Haidar Pasha, Chief of Staff Harid Pasha and other high-ranking officers. However, scandal subsided over time and the King was able to eventually reappoint Haidar and Harid to their old positions.

Prelude

During the winter of 1951–1952 nationalist police officers began protecting and promoting fedayeen (the Egyptian resistance) attacks on British authorities in Cairo, Alexandria, and the Suez Canal. After repelling a particularly devastating attack on British shipping and facilities near Ismailia which resulted in the death of several British soldiers, British troops tracked the fedayeen into the city. On 25 January 1952, British troops discovered the fedayeen had retreated into the local police barracks. When the police refused to surrender the fedayeen, the British officer attempted to negotiate the surrender of the police and the fedayeen. When their negotiator was killed in the parley by the fedayeen, the British force attacked the Egyptian police barracks in Ismailia. Fifty Egyptian police officers were killed and one hundred were wounded. Egypt erupted in fury.

Subsequently, Free Officer Movement cells initiated riots in Cairo which led to arsons. Without suppression from local fire brigades, these arson attacks further inflamed more rioting. American and Soviet newspapers promoted the incident on global wire outlets as the "Cairo Fires" and suggested they were seen as further evidence of the beginning of the end of the monarchy.

The next day, 26 January 1952 ("Black Saturday"), what many Egyptians call "the second revolution" broke out (the first being the Egyptian revolution of 1919). King Farouk dismissed Mustafa el-Nahhas's government and declared martial law on the same day.

In the months that followed, three different politicians were instructed to form governments, each proving short-lived: Ali Maher (27 January – 1 March), Ahmed Naguib El-Hilali (2 March – 29 June, and 22–23 July) and Hussein Sirri (2–20 July). These "salvation ministries", as they were called, failed to halt the country's downward spiral. Corruption remained ubiquitous despite attempts by successive prime ministers to put their political houses in order.

Stirrings of discontent were felt in the army, and in January 1952 opposition officers supported by the Free Officers gained control of the governing board of the Officers Club. On 16 July, the King annulled these elections, appointing his own supporters instead in an attempt to regain control of the army.

A coup d'état had originally been planned for 5 August, but the coup leaders advanced their plans to the night of 22 July, after General Naguib—one of the Free Officers and General Pasha's temporary replacement as Commander and Chief of the Armed Forces— informed that group on 19 July that the Egyptian Royal Army high command had a list of their names.

Military coup

Members of the Free Officers gathered after the coup d'état. From left to right: Zakaria Mohieddin, Abdel Latif Boghdadi, Kamel el-Din Hussein, Gamal Abdel Nasser (seated), Abdel Hakim Amer, Muhammad Naguib, Youssef Seddik and Ahmed Shawki

While the Free Officers planned to overthrow the monarchy on 2–3 August, they decided to make their move earlier after their official leader, Muhammad Naguib, gained knowledge, leaked from the Egyptian cabinet on 19 July, that King Farouk acquired a list of the dissenting officers and was set to arrest them. The officers thus decided to launch a preemptive strike and after finalizing their plans in meeting at the home of Khaled Mohieddin, they began their coup on the night of 22 July. Mohieddin stayed in his home and Anwar Sadat went to the cinema.

Meanwhile, the chairman of the Free Officers, Gamal Abdel Nasser, contacted the Muslim Brotherhood and the communist Democratic Movement for National Liberation to assure their support. On the morning of 23 July, he and Abdel Hakim Amer left Mohieddin's home in civilian clothes and drove around Cairo in Nasser's automobile to collect men to arrest key royalist commanders before they reached their barracks and gain control over their soldiers. As they approached the el-Qoba Bridge, an artillery unit led by Youssef Seddik met with them before he led his battalion to take control the Military General Headquarters to arrest the royalist army chief of staff, Hussein Sirri Amer and all the other commanders who were present in the building. At 6:00 am the Free Officers air force units began circling Cairo's skies.

Declaration of revolution

At 7:30 a.m., a broadcasting station issued the first communiqué of the coup d'état in the name of Gen. Naguib to the Egyptian people. It attempted to justify the coup, which was also known as the "Blessed Movement". The person reading the message was Free Officer and future president of Egypt Anwar Sadat. The coup was conducted by less than a hundred officers - almost all of which were drawn from junior ranks — and prompted scenes of celebration in the streets by cheering mobs.

Egypt has passed through a critical period in her recent history characterized by bribery, mischief, and the absence of governmental stability. All of these were factors that had a large influence on the army. Those who accepted bribes and were thus influenced caused our defeat in the Palestine War . As for the period following the war, the mischief-making elements have been assisting one another, and traitors have been commanding the army. They appointed a commander who is either ignorant or corrupt. Egypt has reached the point, therefore, of having no army to defend it. Accordingly, we have undertaken to clean ourselves up and have appointed to command us men from within the army whom we trust in their ability, their character, and their patriotism. It is certain that all Egypt will meet this news with enthusiasm and will welcome it. As for those whose arrest we saw fit from among men formerly associated with the army, we will not deal harshly with them, but will release them at the appropriate time. I assure the Egyptian people that the entire army today has become capable of operating in the national interest and under the rule of the constitution apart from any interests of its own. I take this opportunity to request that the people never permit any traitors to take refuge in deeds of destruction or violence because these are not in the interest of Egypt. Should anyone behave in such ways, he will be dealt with forcefully in a manner such as has not been seen before and his deeds will meet immediately the reward for treason. The army will take charge with the assistance of the police. I assure our foreign brothers that their interests, their personal safety , and their property are safe, and that the army considers itself responsible for them. May God grant us success .

With his British support network now neutralized, King Farouk sought the intervention of the United States, which was unresponsive. By the 25th, the army had occupied Alexandria, where the king was in residence at the Montaza Palace. Terrified, Farouk abandoned Montaza and fled to Ras Al-Teen Palace on the waterfront. Naguib ordered the captain of Farouk's yacht, al-Mahrusa, not to sail without orders from the army.

Debate broke out among the Free Officers concerning the fate of the deposed king. While some (including Gen. Naguib and Nasser) thought that the best course of action was to send him into exile, others argued that he should be put on trial or executed. Finally, the order came for Farouk to abdicate in favour of his son, Crown Prince Ahmed Fuad - who was acceded to the throne as King Fuad II - and a three-man Regency Council was appointed. The former king's departure into exile came on Saturday, 26 July 1952 and at 6 o'clock that evening he set sail for Italy with protection from the Egyptian army. On 28 July 1953, Muhammad Naguib became the first President of Egypt, which marked the beginning of modern Egyptian governance.

Consolidation

Members of the Free Officers welcomed by crowds in Cairo in January 1953. Standing in the automobile, from left to right: Youssef Seddik, Salah Salem, Gamal Abdel Nasser and Abdel Latif Boghdadi

The Revolution Command Council (RCC), made up of the previous nine-member command committee of the Free Officers in addition to five more members, chaired by Naguib, was formed. Ali Maher was asked to form a civilian government. When the Free Officers started isolating elements sympathizing with the Soviet Union, communist cadres led workers riots in Kafr Dawar on 12 August 1952, which resulted in two death sentences. Ali Maher who still sympathised with the British resigned on 7 September following differences with the officers, principally over proposed land reform. Naguib became prime minister, with Nasser as deputy prime minister. On 9 September, the Agrarian Reform Law was passed, which immediately seized any European-owned, especially British owned property in Egypt. This was followed by signaling a major land redistribution programme among peasant farmers which gained most of the seized land. In a bid to stop concentration of land ownership, the regime placed a ceiling of 200 feddans on land ownership. On 9 December, the RCC without due process decreed that the 1923 Constitution of Egypt was abrogated "in the name of the people."

On 16 January 1953 the officers of the RCC dissolved and banned all political parties, declaring a three-year transitional period during which the RCC would rule. A provisional Constitutional Charter, written by the close circle of usurpers, was written with the intention of giving a veneer of legitimacy to the RCC. This new Constitution was proclaimed on 10 February, and the Liberation Rally — the first of three political organisations linked to the July regime — was launched soon afterwards with the aim of mobilising popular support. The Rally was headed by Nasser and included other Free Officers as secretaries-general. On 18 June, the RCC declared Egypt a republic abolishing the monarchy (the infant son of Farouk had been reigning as King Fuad II) and appointing General Naguib, aged 52, as first president and prime minister. Gamal Abdel Nasser, 35, was appointed deputy premier and minister of the interior. A "Revolutionary Tribunal" consisting of RCC members Abdel Latif Boghdadi, Sadat and Hassan Ibrahim, was set up to try politicians of the ancien régime.

In opposition to the Constitution with its overt secularism was the Muslim Brotherhood. Additionally, contrary to orders issued by the Council, members of the Liberation Rally accumulated much of the seized non-Muslim property and distributed amongst their closed networks. Angered at being left out of the political and economic spoils and seeing a continuation of secularism and modernity within the Free Officers Movement such as had existed under the King, the Muslim Brotherhood organized its street elements. From June 1953 into the following year, Egypt was wracked by street riots, clashes, arson, and civil tumult as the regime and the Muslim Brotherhood battled for popular support.

1954

In January, the Muslim Brotherhood was outlawed. It remained an illegal political organization until the revolution of 2011. The move came in the wake of clashes between members of the Brotherhood and Liberation Rally student demonstrators on 12 January 1954. March witnessed clashes within the RCC, symbolized in the attempt, ultimately successful, to oust Naguib. The move faced opposition from within the army, and some members of the RCC, especially Khaled Mohieddin, favored a return to constitutional government. On 26 October, an assassination attempt suspected by the Brotherhood was directed at Nasser during a rally in Alexandria. This led to the regime acting against the Brotherhood, executing Brotherhood leaders on 9 December. Nasser subsequently cemented power, first becoming chairman of the RCC, and finally prime minister, with Naguib's constitutional position remaining vague until 14 November, when he was dismissed from office and placed under house arrest.

Meanwhile, the RCC managed to remain united in its opposition to the British and French, specifically in regard to the Suez Canal. Despite continued calls from the RCC, in debates in the United Nations, and pressure from both the U.S. and USSR, the British refused to transfer control of the Canal to the new regime. The RCC began funding and coordinating ever greater attacks on the British and French in the Suez Canal Zone, and Damietta. Finally, on 19 October, Nasser signed a treaty for the evacuation of British troops from Egypt, to be completed over the following 20 months. Two years later, on 18 June 1956, Nasser raised the Egyptian flag over the Canal Zone, announcing the complete evacuation of British troops.

1956

President Nasser announced a new Constitution on 16 January at a popular rally, setting up a presidential system of government in which the president has the power to appoint and dismiss ministers. An elections law was passed on 3 March granting women the right to vote for the first time in Egyptian history. Nasser was elected as the second president of the Republic on 23 June. In 1957, Nasser announced the formation of the National Union (Al-Ittihad Al-Qawmi), paving the way to July elections for the National Assembly, the first parliament since 1952.

Commemoration

The anniversary of the coup d'état is commemorated on Revolution Day, an annual public holiday in Egypt, on 23 July.

See also

Egypt portal

Politics portal

Nasserism

Egyptian revolution of 1919

Egyptian revolution of 2011

June 2013 Egyptian protests

History of modern Egypt

List of modern conflicts in the Middle East

List of Chiefs of the General Staff of Egypt

References

^ Egypt as Recipient of Soviet Aid, 1955-1970
KAREL HOLBIK and EDWARD DRACHMAN
Zeitschrift für die gesamte Staatswissenschaft / Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics
Bd. 127, H. 1. (Januar 1971), pp. 137-165

^ a b Matthew, Holland (1996). America and Egypt: From Roosevelt to Eisenhower. United States of America: Praeger. p. 27. ISBN 0-275-95474-9.

^ Lahav, Pnina. "The Suez Crisis of 1956 and its Aftermath: A Comparative Study of Constitutions, Use of Force, Diplomacy and International Relations". Boston University Law Review.

^ The Long Struggle: The Seeds of the Muslim World's Frustration by Amil Khan (2010), p. 58

^ a b c d e https://www.cia.gov/library/readingroom/docs/CIA-RDP91T01172R000200280003-8.pdf

^ a b Hilton Proctor Goss and Charles Marion Thomas. American Foreign Policy in Growth and Action, 3rd ed. Documentary Research Division, Research Studies Institute, Air University, 1959. p. 273.

^ Alexander, 2005, p. 41.

^ Alexander, p. 42.

^ Ibrahim, Sammar. 'Profile: Anwar Al-Sadat' Archived 2007-11-25 at the Wayback Machine, Egypt State Information Service, Retrieved on 2008-07-20.

^ Egypt on the Brink by Tarek Osman, Yale University Press, 2010, p. 40

Watry, David M. Diplomacy at the Brink: Eisenhower, Churchill, and Eden in the Cold War. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2014.

External links

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to 1952 Egyptian revolution.

Egyptian revolution 25/01/11

The Long Revolution

Egyptian Royalty by Ahmed S. Kamel, Hassan Kamel Kelisli-Morali, Georges Soliman and Magda Malek.

L'Egypte d'antan... Egypt in Bygone Days by Max Karkegi.

v

t

e

Major revolts and riots in modern Egypt

Major events before 2010 
'Urabi revolt (1879–1882)

Egyptian Revolution of 1919

Helwan riots (1945)

1945 Anti-Jewish riots in Egypt

Cairo fire (1952)

Egyptian revolution of 1952

Corrective Revolution (1971)

1977 Egyptian bread riots

1986 Egyptian conscripts riot

2000 Kosheh lynchings

2005 Alexandria riot

2008 Egyptian general strike

Egyptian Crisis (2011–14) 
Egyptian revolution of 2011

2011 Maspero demonstrations

Sinai insurgency (2011–present)

2012–13 Egyptian protests

2013 Egyptian coup d'état

Post-coup unrest in Egypt (2013–2014)

Timeline of insurgency in Egypt (2013–present)

2017–present 
2017 Warraq Island protests

2019 Egyptian protests

Egyptian National Action Group

v

t

e

Egypt topics

History

Chronology 
Prehistoric

Ancient
topics

Achaemenid
27th Dynasty

31st Dynasty

Ptolemaic
Battle of Actium

Lighthouse of Alexandria

Roman
Diocese of Egypt

Library of Alexandria

Christian

Sassanid

Muslim
Muslim conquest

Islamization

Fustat

Tulunid dynasty

Ikhshidid dynasty

Fatimid Caliphate
Crusader invasions

Ayyubid dynasty

Mamluk Sultanate
Mamluk

Ottoman
Egypt Eyalet

Muhammad Ali dynasty

Nahda

Khedivate
Ethiopian–Egyptian War

‘Urabi revolt

Modern
French occupation
Revolt of Cairo

British occupation
1919 revolution

World War II

Sultanate

Kingdom
1948 Arab–Israeli War

Republic
Nasser era
1952 coup d'état

Land reform

Suez Crisis

United Arab Republic

Six-Day War

Sadat era
Yom Kippur War

Libyan–Egyptian War

Assassination of Anwar Sadat

Mubarak era

2010s Crisis
2013 Rabaa massacre

By topic 
Anarchism

Capital

Cigarette industry

Constitution

Copts

Genetic

Healthcare

Jews

Muslim Brotherhood
1928-38

1939-54

1954-present

Parliament

Population

Postal

Saladin

Timekeeping devices

By city 
Alexandria

Cairo

Port Said

Geography

Biota

Borders

Cities

Climate

Deserts

Earthquakes

Environmental issues

Fossils

Geology

Halfaya Pass

Islands

Lakes

Mountains
Mount Sinai

Nile Delta

Northern coast

Qattara Depression

Red Sea Riviera

Rivers
Nile

Sinai Peninsula

Suez Canal

Towns and villages

Wadis

Wildlife

Politics

Administrative divisions
Governorates

Postal codes

Civil Code

Conflicts

Conscription

Constitution

Elections

Foreign relations
Missions

Islamic extremism

Judiciary

Law enforcement

Massacres

Military
Supreme Council

Nationality law

Parliament

Passport

Political parties

President
list

Prime Minister
list

Proposed new capital

Refugees of the Syrian Civil War

Terrorism
Terrorism and tourism

Twin towns and sister cities

Economy

Agriculture

Banking
National Bank

Companies

Economic regions

Egyptian stock exchange

Egyptian pound

Energy

Entrepreneurship policies

Fishing

Impact on the environment

Lighthouses

Military industry

Mining
Mines

Nuclear program

Power stations
Aswan Dam

Role of the Egyptian Armed Forces

Tallest buildings

Telecommunications
Internet

Tourism
Cultural tourism

Transport
Airlines

Airports

Railway stations

Water supply and sanitation
Water resources management

Society

General 
Abortion

Animal welfare

Billionaires

Cannabis

Capital punishment

Censuses

Corruption

Crime
Human trafficking

Mass sexual assault

Rape

Demographics

Diaspora

Education
Academic grading

Law schools

Medical schools

Schools

Universities

Families
Abaza family

Feminism
Gender inequality

Health
Healthcare

Hospitals

Homelessness

Human rights
Freedom of religion

LGBT rights

International rankings

Languages
Egyptian Arabic

Sa'idi Arabic

Sign Language

Liberalism

Literature

Prostitution

Religion
Bahá'í

Blasphemy law

Christianity
Catholic dioceses

Coptic Churches

Hinduism

Identification card controversy

Irreligion

Islam
Ahmadiyya

Mosques

Niqāb

Judaism
Synagogues

Scientology

Smoking

Units of measurement

Vehicle registration plates

Women

Culture 
Art

Botanical gardens

Castles

Cinema

Coat of arms

Cuisine
Beer

Wine

Films

Flag
list

regions

Football
Football clubs

Football stadiums

Egyptians

Media
Magazines

Newspapers

Radio

TV

Museums

Music

National anthem

Olympics

Public holidays

World Heritage Sites

 Category

 Portal

 WikiProject

 Commons

v

t

e

List of modern conflicts in the Middle East

1910s 
World War I
Middle Eastern theatre

Arab Revolt

Armenian Genocide

Assyrian genocide

Mount Lebanon starvation

Unification of Saudi Arabia

Simko Shikak revolt

Egyptian revolution of 1919

Turkish War of Independence
Greco-Turkish War

Turkish–Armenian War

Franco-Turkish War

Revolts

Mahmud Barzanji revolts

1920s 
Franco-Syrian War

Iraqi revolt against the British

Sectarian conflict in Mandatory Palestine

Adwan Rebellion

Arab separatism in Khuzestan

Great Syrian Revolt

Sheikh Said rebellion

1930s 
Ararat rebellion

Ahmed Barzani revolt

Simele massacre

Saudi–Yemeni War (1934)

Goharshad Mosque rebellion

1935–1936 Iraqi Shia revolts

1935 Yazidi revolt

Dersim rebellion

1940s 
World War II
Italian bombing of Palestine

Anglo-Iraqi War

Syria–Lebanon Campaign

Anglo-Soviet invasion of Iran

1943 Barzani revolt

Alwaziri coup

Al-Wathbah uprising

Kurdish separatism in Iran
Iran crisis of 1946

Arab–Israeli conflict
1948 Arab–Israeli War

1950s 
1952 Egyptian coup d'état

1953 Iranian coup d'état

Jebel Akhdar War

Cyprus Emergency

Suez Crisis

Yemeni–Adenese clan violence

1958 Lebanon crisis

1958 Iraqi revolution

1959 Mosul uprising

1960s 
Cyprus crisis of 1963–1964

Iraqi–Kurdish conflict
First Iraqi–Kurdish War

Dhofar Rebellion

North Yemen Civil War

Feb. 1963 Iraqi coup

Mar. 1963 Syrian coup

Nov. 1963 Iraqi coup

Aden Emergency

1964 Hama riot

Israeli–Palestinian conflict

1966 Syrian coup d'état

Six-Day War

War of Attrition

1970s 
Black September in Jordan

Yemenite War of 1972

Yom Kippur War

Turkish invasion of Cyprus

Shatt al-Arab clashes

Lebanese Civil War

Political violence in Turkey

Islamist uprising in Syria

NDF Rebellion

Yemenite War of 1979

Iranian Revolution
Consolidation of the Iranian Revolution

1979 Qatif Uprising

Grand Mosque seizure

1979–1980 Shia uprising in Iraq

1980s 
Iran–Iraq War

1980 Turkish coup d'état

Kurdish separatism in Turkey
Turkey–PKK conflict

South Yemen Civil War

1986 Egyptian conscripts riot

1986 Damascus bombings

Mecca massacre

Abu Nidal's executions

First Intifada

1990s 
Gulf War (1990–1991)

1991 uprisings in Iraq

Terror campaign in Egypt (1990s)

Yemeni Civil War (1994)

Islamic insurgency in Saudi Arabia (2000–present)

Operation Desert Fox

al-Qaeda insurgency in Yemen

1999 Shia uprising in Iraq

2000s 
Second Intifada

Iraq War

Balochi insurgency in Iran

2004 Qamishli riots

Houthi insurgency in Yemen

Iran–Israel proxy conflict
2006 Lebanon War

Fatah–Hamas conflict

South Yemen insurgency

2010s 
Bahraini uprising of 2011

Egyptian Crisis
Sinai insurgency

Insurgency in Egypt (2013–present)

Syrian Civil War
Turkish involvement in Syria

Syrian War spillover in Lebanon

Iraqi insurgency (2011–2013)

Iraqi Civil War (2014–2017)

Iraqi insurgency (2017–present)

Yemeni Crisis
Yemeni Civil War (2015–present)

2019–20 Persian Gulf crisis

This list includes WWI and later conflicts (after 1914) of at least 100 fatalities each

Prolonged conflicts are listed in the decade when initiated; ongoing conflicts are marked italic and conflict with +100,000 killed with bold.

v

t

e

Cold War

USA

USSR

NATO

ANZUS

SEATO

METO

Warsaw Pact

Non-Aligned Movement

Second Cold War

1940s 
Morgenthau Plan

Hukbalahap Rebellion

Jamaican political conflict

Dekemvriana

Percentages agreement

Yalta Conference

Guerrilla war in the Baltic states
Forest Brothers

Operation Priboi

Operation Jungle

Occupation of the Baltic states

Cursed soldiers

Operation Unthinkable

Operation Downfall

Potsdam Conference

Gouzenko Affair

Division of Korea

Operation Masterdom

Operation Beleaguer

Operation Blacklist Forty

Iran crisis of 1946

Greek Civil War

Baruch Plan

Corfu Channel incident

Turkish Straits crisis

Restatement of Policy on Germany

First Indochina War

Truman Doctrine

Asian Relations Conference

May 1947 crises

Marshall Plan

Comecon

1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état

Al-Wathbah uprising

1947–1949 Palestine war
1947–1948 Civil War in Mandatory Palestine

1948 Arab–Israeli War

1948 Palestinian exodus

Tito–Stalin split

Berlin Blockade

Western betrayal

Iron Curtain

Eastern Bloc

Western Bloc

Chinese Civil War

Malayan Emergency

March 1949 Syrian coup d'état

Albanian Subversion

1950s 
Bamboo Curtain

Korean War

McCarthyism

Mau Mau Uprising

Algerian War

Egyptian revolution of 1952

1953 Iranian coup d'état

East German uprising of 1953

Pact of Madrid

Bricker Amendment

1954 Guatemalan coup d'état

1954 Geneva Conference

Jebel Akhdar War

Vietnam War

First Taiwan Strait Crisis

Cyprus Emergency

Geneva Summit (1955)

Bandung Conference

Poznań protests of 1956

Hungarian Revolution of 1956

Suez Crisis

"We will bury you"

Ifni War

Operation Gladio

Arab Cold War
Syrian Crisis of 1957

1958 Lebanon crisis

Iraqi 14 July Revolution

Sputnik crisis

Second Taiwan Strait Crisis

1959 Tibetan uprising

1959 Mosul uprising

Cuban Revolution
Aftermath of the Cuban Revolution

Kitchen Debate

Sino-Soviet split

1960s 
Congo Crisis

Simba rebellion

1960 U-2 incident

Bay of Pigs Invasion

1960 Turkish coup d'état

Soviet–Albanian split

Iraqi–Kurdish conflict
First Iraqi–Kurdish War

Berlin Crisis of 1961

Berlin Wall

Papua conflict

Sand War

Portuguese Colonial War
Angolan War of Independence

Guinea-Bissau War of Independence

Mozambican War of Independence

Cuban Missile Crisis

El Porteñazo

Sino-Indian War

Communist insurgency in Sarawak

Ramadan Revolution

Eritrean War of Independence

North Yemen Civil War

1963 Syrian coup d'état

Assassination of John F. Kennedy

Aden Emergency

Cyprus crisis of 1963–64

Vietnam War

Shifta War

Mexican Dirty War
Tlatelolco massacre

Guatemalan Civil War

Colombian conflict

1964 Brazilian coup d'état

Dominican Civil War

Rhodesian Bush War

South African Border War

Transition to the New Order (Indonesia)

Domino theory

ASEAN Declaration

Laotian Civil War

1966 Syrian coup d'état

Argentine Revolution

Korean DMZ Conflict

Greek military junta of 1967–1974

Years of Lead (Italy)

USS Pueblo incident

Six-Day War

War of Attrition

Dhofar Rebellion

Al-Wadiah War

Nigerian Civil War

Protests of 1968
May 68

Cultural Revolution

Prague Spring

1968 Polish political crisis

Communist insurgency in Malaysia

Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia

17 July Revolution

1969 Libyan coup d'état

Football War

Goulash Communism

Sino-Soviet border conflict

CPP–NPA–NDF rebellion

Corrective Move

1970s 
Détente

Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty

Black September

Alcora Exercise

Corrective Movement (Syria)

Western Sahara conflict

Cambodian Civil War

Vietnam War

Koza riot

Realpolitik

Ping-pong diplomacy

Corrective Revolution (Egypt)

1971 Turkish military memorandum

1971 Sudanese coup d'état

Four Power Agreement on Berlin

Bangladesh Liberation War

1972 Nixon visit to China

North Yemen-South Yemen Border conflict of 1972

Yemenite War of 1972

Communist insurgency in Bangladesh

Eritrean Civil Wars

1973 Uruguayan coup d'état

1973 Afghan coup d'état

1973 Chilean coup d'état

Yom Kippur War

1973 oil crisis

Carnation Revolution

Spanish transition to democracy

Metapolitefsi

Strategic Arms Limitation Talks

Second Iraqi–Kurdish War

Turkish invasion of Cyprus

Angolan Civil War

Mozambican Civil War

Oromo conflict

Ogaden War

1978 Somali coup d'état attempt

Western Sahara War

Ethiopian Civil War

Lebanese Civil War

Sino-Albanian split

Cambodian–Vietnamese War

Operation Condor

Dirty War (Argentina)

1976 Argentine coup d'état

Libyan–Egyptian War

German Autumn

Korean Air Lines Flight 902

Nicaraguan Revolution

Uganda–Tanzania War

NDF Rebellion

Chadian–Libyan conflict

Yemenite War of 1979

Grand Mosque seizure

Iranian Revolution

Saur Revolution

Sino-Vietnamese War

New Jewel Movement

1979 Herat uprising

Seven Days to the River Rhine

Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union

1980s 
Salvadoran Civil War

Soviet–Afghan War

1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts

Peruvian conflict

Eritrean Civil Wars

1980 Turkish coup d'état

Ugandan Bush War

Gulf of Sidra incident

Casamance conflict

Falklands War

1982 Ethiopian–Somali Border War

Ndogboyosoi War

United States invasion of Grenada

Able Archer 83

Star Wars

Iran–Iraq War

Somali Rebellion

1986 Black Sea incident

South Yemen Civil War

Toyota War

Lord's Resistance Army insurgency

1988 Black Sea bumping incident

Bougainville Civil War

8888 Uprising

Solidarity
Soviet reaction

Contras

Central American crisis

RYAN

Korean Air Lines Flight 007

People Power Revolution

Glasnost

Perestroika

Nagorno-Karabakh War

Afghan Civil War

United States invasion of Panama

1988 Polish strikes

1989 Tiananmen Square protests

Revolutions of 1989

Fall of the Berlin Wall

Fall of the inner German border

Velvet Revolution

Romanian Revolution

Peaceful Revolution

1990s 
Mongolian Revolution of 1990

Gulf War

German reunification

Yemeni unification

Fall of communism in Albania

Breakup of Yugoslavia

Dissolution of Czechoslovakia

Dissolution of the Soviet Union
1991 August Coup

Frozen conflicts 
Abkhazia

China-Taiwan

Korea

Puerto Rico

Kosovo

Nagorno-Karabakh

South Ossetia

Transnistria

Sino-Indian border dispute

North Borneo dispute

Foreign policy 
Truman Doctrine

Containment

Eisenhower Doctrine

Domino theory

Hallstein Doctrine

Kennedy Doctrine

Peaceful coexistence

Ostpolitik

Johnson Doctrine

Brezhnev Doctrine

Nixon Doctrine

Ulbricht Doctrine

Carter Doctrine

Reagan Doctrine

Rollback

Sovereignty of Puerto Rico during the Cold War

Ideologies

Capitalism 
Liberalism

Chicago school

Keynesianism

Libertarianism

Monetarism

Neoclassical economics

Reaganomics

Supply-side economics

Thatcherism

Socialism 
Communism

Marxism–Leninism

Castroism

Eurocommunism

Guevarism

Hoxhaism

Juche

Maoism

Trotskyism

Naxalism

Stalinism

Titoism

Other 
Imperialism

Anti-imperialism

Nationalism

Ultranationalism

Chauvinism

Ethnic nationalism

Racism

Zionism

Fascism

Neo-Nazism

Islamism

Totalitarianism

Authoritarianism

Autocracy

Liberal democracy

Illiberal democracy

Guided democracy

Social democracy

Third-Worldism

White supremacy

White nationalism

White separatism

Apartheid

Organizations 
NATO

SEATO

METO

EEC

Warsaw Pact

Comecon

Non-Aligned Movement

ASEAN

SAARC

CIA

MI6

KGB

Stasi

Safari Club

Propaganda 
Active measures

 Amerika

Crusade for Freedom

Izvestia

Pravda

Voice of America

Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty

Radio Free Asia

Red Scare

Soviet Life

TASS

Races 
Arms race

Nuclear arms race

Space Race

Historians 
Gar Alperovitz

Thomas A. Bailey

Michael Beschloss

Archie Brown

Warren H. Carroll

Adrian Cioroianu

John Costello

Michael Cox

Nicholas J. Cull

Willem Drees

Robert D. English

Herbert Feis

Robert Hugh Ferrell

André Fontaine

Anneli Ute Gabanyi

John Lewis Gaddis

Lloyd Gardner

Timothy Garton Ash

Gabriel Gorodetsky

Fred Halliday

Jussi Hanhimäki

John Earl Haynes

Patrick J. Hearden

Tvrtko Jakovina

Tony Judt

Harvey Klehr

Gabriel Kolko

Walter LaFeber

Walter Laqueur

Melvyn Leffler

Geir Lundestad

Mary Elise Sarotte

Vojtech Mastny

Jack F. Matlock Jr.

Thomas J. McCormick

Timothy Naftali

Marius Oprea

David S. Painter

William B. Pickett

Ronald E. Powaski

Yakov M. Rabkin

Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.

Ellen Schrecker

Giles Scott-Smith

Shen Zhihua

Athan Theoharis

Andrew Thorpe

Vladimir Tismăneanu

Patrick Vaughan

Alex von Tunzelmann

Odd Arne Westad

William Appleman Williams

Jonathan Reed Winkler

Rudolph Winnacker

Ken Young

See also 
Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War

List of Eastern Bloc agents in the United States

Soviet espionage in the United States

Soviet Union–United States relations

USSR–USA summits

Russian espionage in the United States

American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation

Russia–NATO relations

Brinkmanship

CIA and the Cultural Cold War

Second Cold War

Russian Revolution

Category

Commons

Timeline

List of conflicts

Authority control 
GND: 4325282-5

LCCN: sh85041308
