"Family of moths

Erebidae

Black witch moth

Ascalapha odorata, Brazil

Scientific classification 

Kingdom:
 Animalia

Phylum:
 Arthropoda

Class:
 Insecta

Order:
 Lepidoptera

Superfamily:
 Noctuoidea

Family:
 Erebidae

(Leach, )

Eulepidotis affinis, Panama

Apantesis arge caterpillar (Arctiinae)

Halysidota tessellaris, cocoon

The Erebidae are a family of moths in the superfamily Noctuoidea. The family is among the largest families of moths by species count and contains a wide variety of well-known macromoth groups. The family includes the underwings (Catocala); litter moths (Herminiinae); tiger, lichen, and wasp moths (Arctiinae); tussock moths (Lymantriinae), including the arctic woolly bear moth (Gynaephora groenlandica); piercing moths (Calpinae and others); micronoctuoid moths (Micronoctuini); snout moths (Hypeninae); and zales, though many of these common names can also refer to moths outside the Erebidae (for example, crambid snout moths). Some of the erebid moths are called owlets.

The sizes of the adults range from among the largest of all moths (>5 in (127 mm) wingspan in the black witch) to the smallest of the macromoths (0.25 in (6 mm) wingspan in some of the Micronoctuini). The coloration of the adults spans the full range of dull, drab, and camouflaged (e.g., Zale lunifera and litter moths) to vivid, contrasting, and colorful (e.g., Aganainae and tiger moths). The moths are found on all continents except Antarctica.

Contents

1 Subfamilies

2 Classification

3 References

4 External links

Subfamilies

Aganainae

Anobinae

Arctiinae – tiger, lichen, and wasp moths

Boletobiinae

Calpinae – piercing moths

Erebinae – underwings and kin

Eulepidotinae

Herminiinae – litter moths

Hypeninae – snout moths

Hypenodinae – includes the micronoctuoids

Hypocalinae

Lymantriinae – tussock moths

Pangraptinae

Rivulinae

Scolecocampinae

Scoliopteryginae – piercing moths

Tinoliinae

Toxocampinae

Classification

Among the Noctuoidea, the Erebidae can be broadly defined by the wing characteristics of the adults with support from phylogenetic studies. The cubital forewing vein, which runs outward from the base of a wing to the outer margin, splits into two (bifid), three (trifid), or four (quadrifid) veins from the medial area to the outer margin. These split veins are named M2, M3, CuA1, and CuA2 in order toward the inner margin. A trifid forewing has either a reduced or vestigial M2 vein or the M2 vein does not connect to the cubital veins, while M2 is as thick as M3 and connects or nearly connects to M3 in a quadrifid forewing. The same splitting of the hindwing cubital vein has analogous terms bifine, trifine, and quadrifine. The Erebidae typically have quadrifid forewings and quadrifine hindwings, though the Micronoctuini are exceptional with their bifine hindwings. Among the related families, most Erebidae are quadrifid moths like the Euteliidae, Nolidae, and Noctuidae and unlike the trifid Oenosandridae and Notodontidae. And among the quadrifid moths, the Erebidae have quadrifine hindwings like the typical Nolidae and Euteliidae and unlike the typical Noctuidae.

Phylogenetic studies in the present century have helped to clarify the relationships between the structurally diverse lineages within the Noctuoidea and within the Erebidae. Morphological studies had led to a classification in which the monophyletic Arctiinae, Lymantriinae, and Micronoctuini were treated as families, and the other erebid lineages were largely grouped within the Noctuidae. Recent studies combining genetic characteristics with the morphological ones revealed that the former Noctuidae were paraphyletic, and some of the lineages within the Noctuidae were more closely related to the Arctiinae, Lymantriinae, and Micronoctuini families than to the other lineages within the Noctuidae.

The determination of these phylogenetic relationships has led to the present classification scheme in which several clades were rearranged while kept mostly intact and others were split apart. The Erebidae are one monophyletic family among six in the Noctuoidea. A more strictly defined family Noctuidae is also monophyletic, but the family lacks the quadrifine moths now placed as part of the Erebidae. Some subfamilies of the Noctuidae, such as the Herminiinae, were moved as a whole to Erebidae. Other subfamilies, including the Acontiinae and Calpinae, were each split apart. The Arctiinae became an erebid subfamily placed next to the closely related Herminiinae. The Lymantriinae became another erebid subfamily placed near the Pangraptinae. The rank of the Micronoctuini was changed from family to tribe to include the clade as a lineage within the Hypenodinae. The Erebidae are currently divided into 18 subfamilies, some of which are strongly supported by phylogenetic analysis and may persist through further study, while others are weakly supported and may be redefined again.

References

^ Kukal, Olga; Dawson, Todd E. (1989-06-01). "Temperature and food quality influences feeding behavior, assimilation efficiency and growth rate of arctic woolly-bear caterpillars". Oecologia. 79 (4): 526–532. doi:10.1007/BF00378671. ISSN 0029-8549. PMID 28313488.

^ Zahiri, Reza; et al. (2012). "Molecular phylogenetics of Erebidae (Lepidoptera, Noctuoidea)". Systematic Entomology. 37: 102–124. doi:10.1111/j.1365-3113.2011.00607.x.

^ Lafontaine, Donald; Schmidt, Christian (19 Mar 2010). "Annotated check list of the Noctuoidea (Insecta, Lepidoptera) of North America north of Mexico". ZooKeys (40): 1–239. doi:10.3897/zookeys.40.414.

^ Zahiri, Reza; et al. (2013). "Relationships among the basal lineages of Noctuidae (Lepidoptera, Noctuoidea) based on eight gene regions". Zoologica Scripta. 42 (5): 488–507. doi:10.1111/zsc.12022.

External links

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Erebidae.

 Wikispecies has information related to Erebidae

Images of Erebidae moths in New Zealand

Images of Erebidae in Bugguide.net

v

t

e

Extant Lepidoptera families

Kingdom: Animalia

Phylum: Arthropoda

Class: Insecta

Subclass: Pterygota

Infraclass: Neoptera

Superorder: Endopterygota

Suborder Zeugloptera

Micropterigoidea Micropterigidae (mandibulate archaic moths)

Suborder Aglossata

Agathiphagoidea Agathiphagidae (kauri moths)

Suborder Heterobathmiina

Heterobathmioidea Heterobathmiidae

Suborder Glossata

Dacnonypha

Eriocranioidea 
Eriocraniidae

Acanthoctesia

Acanthopteroctetoidea 
Acanthopteroctetidae (archaic sun moths)

Lophocoronina

Lophocoronoidea Lophocoronidae

Neopseustina

Neopseustoidea 
Aenigmatineidae

Neopseustidae (archaic bell moths)

Exoporia

Hepialoidea 
Anomosetidae

Hepialidae (swift moths, ghost moths)

Neotheoridae (Amazonian primitive ghost moths)

Palaeosetidae (miniature ghost moths)

Prototheoridae (African primitive ghost moths)

Mnesarchaeoidea 
Mnesarchaeidae (New Zealand primitive moths)

H

e

t

e

r

o

n

e

u

r

a

M

o

n

o

t

r

y

s

i

a

Adeloidea 
Adelidae (fairy longhorn moths)

Cecidosidae

Heliozelidae

Incurvariidae

Prodoxidae (yucca moths)

Andesianoidea 
Andesianidae (Andean endemic moths)

Nepticuloidea 
Nepticulidae (pigmy, or midget moths)

Opostegidae (white eyecap moths)

Palaephatoidea 
Palaephatidae (Gondwanaland moths)

Tischerioidea 
Tischeriidae (trumpet leaf miner moths)

D

i

t

r

y

s

i

a

Simaethistoidea 
Simaethistidae

Tineoidea 
Acrolophidae (burrowing webworm moths)

Arrhenophanidae

Eriocottidae (Old World spiny-winged moths)

Lypusidae

Psychidae (bagworm moths)

Tineidae (fungus moths)

Gracillarioidea 
Bucculatricidae (ribbed cocoon makers)

Douglasiidae (Douglas moths)

Gracillariidae

Roeslerstammiidae

Yponomeutoidea 
Acrolepiidae (false diamondback moths)

Bedelliidae

Glyphipterigidae (sedge moths)

Heliodinidae

Lyonetiidae

Plutellidae

Yponomeutidae (ermine moths)

Ypsolophidae

Gelechioidea 
Autostichidae

Batrachedridae

Blastobasidae

Coleophoridae (case-bearers, case moths)

Cosmopterigidae (cosmet moths)

Elachistidae (grass-miner moths)

Gelechiidae (twirler moths)

Lecithoceridae (long-horned moths)

Metachandidae

Momphidae (mompha moths)

Oecophoridae (concealer moths)

Pterolonchidae

Scythrididae (flower moths)

Xyloryctidae (timber moths)

Galacticoidea 
Galacticidae

Zygaenoidea 
Heterogynidae

Zygaenidae (burnet, forester, or smoky moths)

Himantopteridae

Lacturidae

Somabrachyidae

Megalopygidae (flannel moths)

Aididae

Anomoeotidae

Cyclotornidae

Epipyropidae (planthopper parasite moths)

Dalceridae (slug caterpillars)

Limacodidae (slug, or cup moths)

Cossoidea 
Cossidae (carpenter millers, or goat moths)

Dudgeoneidae (dudgeon carpenter moths)

Sesioidea 
Brachodidae (little bear moths)

Castniidae (castniid moths: giant butterfly-moths, sun moths)

Sesiidae (clearwing moths)

Choreutoidea 
Choreutidae (metalmark moths)

Tortricoidea 
Tortricidae (tortrix moths)

Urodoidea 
Urodidae (false burnet moths)

Schreckensteinioidea 
Schreckensteiniidae (bristle-legged moths)

Epermenioidea 
Epermeniidae (fringe-tufted moths)

Alucitoidea 
Alucitidae (many-plumed moths)

Tineodidae (false plume moths)

Pterophoroidea 
Pterophoridae (plume moths)

Whalleyanoidea 
Whalleyanidae

Immoidea 
Immidae

Copromorphoidea 
Copromorphidae (tropical fruitworm moths)

Carposinidae (fruitworm moths)

Thyridoidea 
Thyrididae (picture-winged leaf moths)

Calliduloidea 
Callidulidae (Old World butterfly-moths)

Papilionoidea

(butterflies) 
Papilionidae (swallowtail butterflies)

Hedylidae (American moth-butterflies)

Hesperiidae (skippers)

Pieridae (whites, yellows, orangetips, sulphurs)

Riodinidae (metalmarks)

Lycaenidae (gossamer-winged butterflies: blues, coppers and relatives)

Nymphalidae (brush-footed, or four-footed butterflies)

Hyblaeoidea 
Hyblaeidae (teak moths)

Pyraloidea 
Pyralidae (snout moths)

Crambidae (grass moth)

Mimallonoidea 
Mimallonidae (sack bearer moths)

Lasiocampoidea 
Lasiocampidae (eggars, snout moths, or lappet moths)

Bombycoidea 
Anthelidae (Australian lappet moth)

Apatelodidae (American silkworm moths)

Bombycidae (silk moths)

Brahmaeidae (Brahmin moths)

Carthaeidae (Dryandra moth)

Endromidae (Kentish glory and relatives)

Eupterotidae

Phiditiidae

Saturniidae (saturniids)

Sphingidae (hawk moths, sphinx moths and hornworms)

Noctuoidea 
Erebidae (underwing, tiger, tussock, litter, snout, owlet moths)

Euteliidae

Noctuidae (daggers, sallows, owlet moths, quakers, cutworms, darts)

Nolidae (tuft moths)

Notodontidae (prominents, kittens)

Oenosandridae

Drepanoidea 
Drepanidae (hook-tips)

Cimeliidae (gold moths)

Doidae

Geometroidea 
Sematuridae

Pseudobistonidae

Epicopeiidae (oriental swallowtail moths)

Uraniidae

Geometridae (geometer moths)

Superfamily unassigned 
Millieriidae

Note: division Monotrysia is not a clade.

Taxonomy of the Lepidoptera

Lists by region

Taxon identifiers 
Wikidata: Q2068481

Wikispecies: Erebidae

BAMONA: Erebidae

BioLib: 896027

BugGuide: 43743

EoL: 4127950

Fauna Europaea: 431650

Fauna Europaea (new): 196aa783-9827-45ef-a294-87f384ad6742

Fossilworks: 245053

GBIF: 4532185

iNaturalist: 121850

IRMNG: 122369

ITIS: 936921

NBN: NHMSYS0020959403

NCBI: 695564

NZOR: 85a513e7-ba2e-49c2-9170-a08742629bf8

WoRMS: 989023
