"Breed of cat

Breed of cat

Exotic Shorthair

Brown Tabby Exotic Shorthair

Male Cat – 9 year old

Origin United States

Breed standards

CFA standard

FIFe standard

TICA standard

AACE 

Domestic cat (Felis catus)

The Exotic Shorthair is a breed of cat developed as a short-haired version of the Persian. The Exotic is similar to the Persian in many ways, including temperament and conformation, a flat nose and face with the exceptions of the short dense coat.

In the late 1950s, the Persian was used as an outcross by some American Shorthair breeders. This was done in secret in order to improve their body type, and crosses were also made with the Russian Blue and the Burmese. The crossbreed look gained recognition in the show ring, but unhappy American Shorthair breeders successfully produced a new breed standard that would disqualify American Shorthairs that showed signs of crossbreeding. One American Shorthair breeder who saw the potential of the Persian/American Shorthair cross proposed and eventually got the Cat Fanciers' Association judge and American Shorthair breeder Jane Martinke to recognize them as a new breed in 1966, under the name Exotic Shorthair. In 1987, the Cat Fanciers' Association closed the Exotic to shorthair outcrosses, leaving Persian as the only allowable outcross breed. 

Because of the regular use of Persian as outcrosses, some Exotics may carry a copy of the recessive longhair gene. When two such cats mate, there is a 1 in 4 chance of each offspring being longhaired. Longhaired Exotics are not considered Persians by the Cat Fanciers' Association, although The International Cat Association accepts them as Persians. Other associations like the American Cat Fanciers Association register them as a separate Exotic Longhair breed.

Contents

1 Description

2 Characteristics

3 Care and grooming

4 Health

5 Recognition

6 References

7 External links

Description

The Exotic Shorthair meets every standard for the Persian breed, except for the coat.

Head: Oval, massive. Very broad skull. Rounded forehead. Round, full cheeks. Short, broad, round muzzle. Short, broad nose with pronounced stop، Strong chin. Broad, powerful jaws.

Ears: Small, rounded at the tip, not too open at the base. Widely spaced and well-furnished with hair on the inside.

Eyes: Large and round. Pure, deep color corresponding to that of the coat (gold to copper in most varieties; green in the chinchilla and the golden; blue in the white and the colorpoint).

Neck: Short and thick.

Body: Medium-sized, cobby, low to the ground. Broad chest. Massive shoulders. Large-boned with powerful muscles. Weight: 3.5 – 6 kilograms.

Paw: Short, straight and large. Round, large paws. Tufts of hair between the toes.

Tail: Short, thick, carried low. Rounded tip.

Coat: Shorthaired but slightly longer than other shorthaired breeds. Dense, fluffy, erect hair. All Persian colors are recognized.

Characteristics

Male Exotic Shorthair – 12 months

Exotic Shorthairs have a gentle and calm personality reminiscent of the Persian, but are generally livelier than their longhaired ancestors. Curious and playful, they are friendly to other cats and dogs, but they don't like being left alone and need the presence of their owner. They tend to show more affection and loyalty than most breeds and make excellent lap cats. Their calm, steady nature makes them ideal apartment cats for city dwellers. Nonetheless, Exotics retain some of the energetic spark of the American Shorthair, and they are often capable mouse hunters.

Care and grooming

Unlike the high-maintenance Persian, the Exotic is able to keep its own fur tidy with little human assistance, though weekly brushing and combing is recommended to remove loose hair and reduce shedding and hairballs.

As with other flat-faced animals, the Exotic's tear ducts are prone to overflowing due to the nasolacrimal duct, which can dampen and stain the face. This can be relieved by periodically wiping the cat's face with a cloth moistened with water or one of the commercial preparations made expressly for the purpose.

This breed ages slowly, as it does not reach maturity until around two years of age and enters puberty fairly late. When two Exotic Shorthairs are crossed, they may produce long-haired kittens called "Exotic Longhairs" by the Cat Fanciers' Association. Externally, they look like Persians.

Health

See also: Persian cat health

The Exotic Shorthair is a brachycephalous breed, meaning that its problems result from having the nose and eyes in close proximity to each other, giving the appearance of a pushed-in face. As well as issues with the tear ducts, sinus problems can also occur. Due to the shortened jaw, there is a chance of tooth misalignment or tooth crowding.

12 week old white female Exotic Shorthair

Brachycephalic airway obstructive syndrome. Also referred to as brachycephalic respiratory syndrome or congenital obstructive upper airway disease, this causes upper airway abnormalities ranging in severity. The syndrome can cause increased airway resistance, inflammation of structures in the airways, and increased strain on the heart. Treatment includes weight loss, surgery, and avoiding humid or hot conditions.

Calcium oxalate urolithiasis. A stone that crystallizes in the bladder and kidney.

Dystocia. An abnormal labor due to large-domed skulls.

Feline polycystic kidney disease (PKD). Exotic Shorthairs, as well as Persians and other Persian-derived cats, have a high chance of inheriting PKD, a disease that can lead to kidney failure. Several studies using ultrasound scan screening have shown that the prevalence of PKD in Exotics is between 40–50% in developed nations. DNA screening for PKD is recommended for all Exotic cats used in breeding programs to reduce the incidence of kidney disease by spaying and neutering PKD positive cats.

Recognition

The Exotic has steadily gained popularity among cat fanciers with the help of the devoted advocates of the breed who saw the value in a Persian and Shorthair crossbreed. 

In 1967, the Exotic Shorthair was first accepted for Championship status by the Cat Fanciers' Association.

In 1971, the first Exotic Shorthair achieved the status of Grand Champion.

In 1986, the Fédération Internationale Féline recognized the Exotic Shorthair.

In 1991, an Exotic was the Cat Fanciers' Association's Cat of the Year.

In 1992, the Cat Fanciers' Association's Best Kitten was an Exotic.

References

^ "Exotic Shorthair". PetMD.

^ Helgren, J. Anne. (2006) Iams Cat Breed Guide: Exotic Shorthair Telemark Productions

^ "Exotic Shorthair". VetStreet.

^ "About The Exotic". The Cat Fancier's Association.

^ "Brachycephalic Airway Syndrome in Cats". VCA Animal Hospitals.

^ "Dystocia (difficult birth) in Cats". Cat World.

^ Beck, C.; Lavelle, R. B. (2001). "Feline polycystic kidney disease in Persian and other cats: A prospective study using ultrasonography". Australian Veterinary Journal. 79 (3): 181–184. doi:10.1111/j.1751-0813.2001.tb14573.x. PMID 11301745.

^ Bonazzi, M.; Volta, A.; Gnudi, G.; Bottarelli, E.; Gazzola, M.; Bertoni, G. (2007). "Prevalence of the polycystic kidney disease and renal and urinary bladder ultrasonographic abnormalities in Persian and Exotic Shorthair cats in Italy". Journal of Feline Medicine & Surgery. 9 (5): 387–391. doi:10.1016/j.jfms.2007.03.004.

^ Barthez, P. Y.; Rivier, P.; Begon, D. (2003). "Prevalence of polycystic kidney disease in Persian and Persian related cats in France". Journal of Feline Medicine and Surgery. 5 (6): 345–347. doi:10.1016/s1098-612x(03)00052-4. PMID 14623204.

^ "Exotic Shorthair Cat". Pet Finder.

External links

Cat Fanciers Association Exotic Breed Council

v

t

e

Domestic cats

Felinology 
Anatomy

Genetics

Dwarf cat

Kitten

Odd-eyed cat

Squitten

Coat genetics

Bicolor cat

Black cat

Calico cat

Tabby cat

Tortoiseshell cat

Health 
Aging

Declawing

Diet
dental health

senior

Neutering
Spaying

Vaccination

Behavior 
Body language

Catfight

Catnip
valerian

Communication
Meow

Purr

Kneading

Intelligence

Play and toys

Righting reflex

Senses

Human–cat

interaction 
Ailurophobia

Animal-assisted therapy

Bodega cat

Cat cafés

Cat massage

Cat meat

Cat-scratch disease

Cat show

Cats in ancient Egypt

Cultural depictions

Farm cat

Feral cat

Cats and Islam

Puppy cat

Ship's cat

Zoonosis

Registries 
American Cat Fanciers Association

Associazione Nazionale Felina Italiana

Canadian Cat Association

Cat Aficionado Association

Cat Fanciers' Association

Fédération Internationale Féline

Governing Council of the Cat Fancy

Southern Africa Cat Council

The International Cat Association

World Cat Congress

World Cat Federation

Breeds

(full list)

(experimental) 
Fully domestic

Abyssinian

American Curl

American Shorthair

Balinese

Brazilian Shorthair

British Shorthair

Birman

Bombay

Burmese

Burmilla

California Spangled

Chartreux

Chinese Li Hua

Colorpoint Shorthair

Cornish Rex

Cymric

Devon Rex

Donskoy

Egyptian Mau

European Shorthair

Exotic Shorthair

German Rex

Himalayan

Japanese Bobtail

Javanese

Khao Manee

Korat

Kurilian Bobtail

Lykoi

Maine Coon

Manx

Munchkin

Norwegian Forest

Ocicat

Ojos Azules

Oriental Shorthair

Persian

Peterbald

Pixie-bob

Raas

Ragdoll

Ragamuffin

Russian Blue

Scottish Fold

Selkirk Rex

Siamese

Siberian

Singapura

Snowshoe

Somali

Sphynx

Thai

Traditional Persian

Tonkinese

Toyger

Turkish Angora

Turkish Van

Hybrid

Bengal

Chausie

Highlander

Savannah

Serengeti

Landraces 
Aegean

Cyprus

Domestic long-haired

Domestic short-haired

Kellas

Sokoke

Van

Diseases and

disorders 
Acne

Asthma

Calicivirus

Congenital sensorineural deafness

Feline corneal sequestrum

Flea

Heartworm

Hepatic lipidosis

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy

Immunodeficiency virus

Infectious peritonitis

Leukemia virus

Lower urinary tract disease

Panleukopenia

Polydactyly

Rabies

Ringworm

Roundworm

Skin disorders

Tick

Toxoplasmosis

Viral rhinotracheitis

 Book

 Category
