"British philosopher

For the cofounder of Intel, see Gordon Moore.

G. E. Moore

Born George Edward Moore

(1873-11-04)4 November 1873

Hastings Lodge, Victoria Road, Dulwich Wood Park, Upper Norwood, London, England

Died 24 October 1958(1958-10-24) (aged 84)

Evelyn Nursing Home, Cambridge, England

Other names "Moore" (colleagues)

"Bill" (family)

Education Trinity College, Cambridge (BA, 1896)

Spouse(s) Dorothy Ely

Era 19th-/20th-century philosophy

Region Western philosophy

School Analytic philosophy

Consequentialism

Institutions Trinity College, Cambridge

Aristotelian Society

(president, 1918–19)

Ethical Union

(president, 1935–36)

Academic advisors James Ward

Doctoral students Casimir Lewy

Other notable students R. B. Braithwaite

Main interests

Ethics

Epistemology

Philosophy of language

Notable ideas

Naturalistic fallacy

Moore's paradox

Paradox of analysis

Open-question argument

External and internal relations

"Here is one hand"

Transparency of consciousness

Influences

Gottlob Frege

John McTaggart

Bertrand Russell

Henry Sidgwick

George Stout

Thomas Reid

Influenced

Bertrand Russell

Ludwig Wittgenstein

W. D. Ross

George Edward Moore OM FBA (4 November 1873 – 24 October 1958), usually cited as G. E. Moore, was an English philosopher. He was, with Bertrand Russell, Ludwig Wittgenstein, and (before them) Gottlob Frege, one of the founders of analytic philosophy. Along with Russell, he led the turn away from idealism in British philosophy, and became well known for his advocacy of common sense concepts, his contributions to ethics, epistemology, and metaphysics, and "his exceptional personality and moral character". 

Moore was Professor of Philosophy at the University of Cambridge, highly influential among (though not a member of) the Bloomsbury Group, and the editor of the influential journal Mind. He was elected a fellow of the British Academy in 1918. He was a member of the Cambridge Apostles, the intellectual secret society, from 1894 to 1901, and chairman of the Cambridge University Moral Sciences Club from 1912 to 1944. A humanist, he served as President of the British Ethical Union (now known as Humanists UK) from 1935 to 1936.

Contents

1 Life

2 Philosophy

2.1 Ethics

2.1.1 The naturalistic fallacy

2.1.2 Open-question argument

2.1.3 Good as indefinable

2.1.4 Good as a non-natural property

2.1.5 Moral knowledge

2.2 Proof of an external world

2.3 Moore's paradox

2.4 Organic wholes

3 Works

4 References

5 Further reading

6 External links

Life

Moore was born in Upper Norwood, in south-east London, on 4 November 1873, the middle child of seven of Dr Daniel Moore and Henrietta Sturge. His grandfather was the author Dr George Moore. His eldest brother was Thomas Sturge Moore, a poet, writer and engraver.

He was educated at Dulwich College and in 1892 went up to Trinity College, Cambridge to study classics and moral sciences. He became a Fellow of Trinity in 1898, and went on to hold the University of Cambridge chair of Mental Philosophy and Logic, from 1925 to 1939.

Moore is best known today for his defence of ethical non-naturalism, his emphasis on common sense in philosophical method, and the paradox that bears his name. He was admired by and influential among other philosophers, and also by the Bloomsbury Group, but is (unlike his colleague and admirer Russell, who, for some years thought he fulfilled his "ideal of genius") mostly unknown today outside of academic philosophy. Moore's essays are known for their clear, circumspect writing style, and for his methodical and patient approach to philosophical problems. He was critical of modern philosophy for its lack of progress, which he believed was in stark contrast to the dramatic advances in the natural sciences since the Renaissance. Among Moore's most famous works are his book Principia Ethica, and his essays, "The Refutation of Idealism", "A Defence of Common Sense", and "A Proof of the External World".

Moore was an important and much admired member of the secretive Cambridge Apostles, a discussion group with members drawn from the British intellectual elite. At the time another member, a 22-year-old Bertrand Russell, wrote “I almost worship him as if he were a god. I have never felt such an extravagant admiration for anybody.” 

From 1918–19 he was president of the Aristotelian Society, a group committed to the systematic study of philosophy, its historical development and its methods and problems.

G. E. Moore died at the Evelyn Nursing Home on 24 October 1958; he was cremated at Cambridge Crematorium on 28 October 1958 and his ashes interred at the Parish of the Ascension Burial Ground in Cambridge; his wife, Dorothy Ely (1892-1977) was buried there. Together they had two sons, the poet Nicholas Moore and the composer Timothy Moore.

Philosophy

Ethics

The title page of Principia Ethica

His influential work Principia Ethica is one of the main inspirations of the movement against ethical naturalism (see ethical non-naturalism) and is partly responsible for the twentieth-century concern with meta-ethics.

The naturalistic fallacy

Main article: Naturalistic fallacy

Moore asserted that philosophical arguments can suffer from a confusion between the use of a term in a particular argument and the definition of that term (in all arguments). He named this confusion the naturalistic fallacy. For example, an ethical argument may claim that if a thing has certain properties, then that thing is 'good.' A hedonist may argue that 'pleasant' things are 'good' things. Other theorists may argue that 'complex' things are 'good' things. Moore contends that, even if such arguments are correct, they do not provide definitions for the term 'good'. The property of 'goodness' cannot be defined. It can only be shown and grasped. Any attempt to define it (X is good if it has property Y) will simply shift the problem (Why is Y-ness good in the first place?).

Open-question argument

Main article: Open-question argument

Moore's argument for the indefinability of 'good' (and thus for the fallaciousness in the "naturalistic fallacy") is often called the open-question argument; it is presented in §13 of Principia Ethica. The argument hinges on the nature of statements such as "Anything that is pleasant is also good" and the possibility of asking questions such as "Is it good that x is pleasant?". According to Moore, these questions are open and these statements are significant; and they will remain so no matter what is substituted for "pleasure". Moore concludes from this that any analysis of value is bound to fail. In other words, if value could be analysed, then such questions and statements would be trivial and obvious. Since they are anything but trivial and obvious, value must be indefinable.

Critics of Moore's arguments sometimes claim that he is appealing to general puzzles concerning analysis (cf. the paradox of analysis), rather than revealing anything special about value. The argument clearly depends on the assumption that if 'good' were definable, it would be an analytic truth about 'good', an assumption that many contemporary moral realists like Richard Boyd and Peter Railton reject. Other responses appeal to the Fregean distinction between sense and reference, allowing that value concepts are special and sui generis, but insisting that value properties are nothing but natural properties (this strategy is similar to that taken by non-reductive materialists in philosophy of mind).

Good as indefinable

Moore contended that goodness cannot be analysed in terms of any other property. In Principia Ethica, he writes:

It may be true that all things which are good are also something else, just as it is true that all things which are yellow produce a certain kind of vibration in the light. And it is a fact, that Ethics aims at discovering what are those other properties belonging to all things which are good. But far too many philosophers have thought that when they named those other properties they were actually defining good; that these properties, in fact, were simply not "other," but absolutely and entirely the same with goodness. (Principia, § 10 ¶ 3)

Therefore, we cannot define 'good' by explaining it in other words. We can only point to a thing or an action and say "That is good." Similarly, we cannot describe to a person born totally blind exactly what yellow is. We can only show a sighted person a piece of yellow paper or a yellow scrap of cloth and say "That is yellow."

Good as a non-natural property

In addition to categorising 'good' as indefinable, Moore also emphasized that it is a non-natural property. This means that it cannot be empirically or scientifically tested or verified—it is not within the bounds of "natural science".

Moral knowledge

Moore argued that, once arguments based on the naturalistic fallacy had been discarded, questions of intrinsic goodness could be settled only by appeal to what he (following Sidgwick) called "moral intuitions": self-evident propositions which recommend themselves to moral reflection, but which are not susceptible to either direct proof or disproof (Principia, § 45). As a result of his view, he has often been described by later writers as an advocate of ethical intuitionism. Moore, however, wished to distinguish his view from the views usually described as "Intuitionist" when Principia Ethica was written:

In order to express the fact that ethical propositions of my first class  are incapable of proof or disproof, I have sometimes followed Sidgwick's usage in calling them 'Intuitions.' But I beg that it may be noticed that I am not an 'Intuitionist,’ in the ordinary sense of the term. Sidgwick himself seems never to have been clearly aware of the immense importance of the difference which distinguishes his Intuitionism from the common doctrine, which has generally been called by that name. The Intuitionist proper is distinguished by maintaining that propositions of my second class—propositions which assert that a certain action is right or a duty—are incapable of proof or disproof by any enquiry into the results of such actions. I, on the contrary, am no less anxious to maintain that propositions of this kind are not 'Intuitions,’ than to maintain that propositions of my first class are Intuitions.

— G. E. Moore, Principia Ethica, Preface ¶ 5

Moore distinguished his view from the view of deontological intuitionists, who held that "intuitions" could determine questions about what actions are right or required by duty. Moore, as a consequentialist, argued that "duties" and moral rules could be determined by investigating the effects of particular actions or kinds of actions (Principia, § 89), and so were matters for empirical investigation rather than direct objects of intuition (Prncipia, § 90). On Moore's view, "intuitions" revealed not the rightness or wrongness of specific actions, but only what things were good in themselves, as ends to be pursued.

Proof of an external world

Main article: Here is one hand

One of the most important parts of Moore's philosophical development was his break from the idealism that dominated British philosophy (as represented in the works of his former teachers F. H. Bradley and John McTaggart), and his defence of what he regarded as a "common sense" form of realism. In his 1925 essay "A Defence of Common Sense", he argued against idealism and scepticism toward the external world, on the grounds that they could not give reasons to accept that their metaphysical premises were more plausible than the reasons we have for accepting the common sense claims about our knowledge of the world, which sceptics and idealists must deny. He famously put the point into dramatic relief with his 1939 essay "Proof of an External World", in which he gave a common sense argument against scepticism by raising his right hand and saying "Here is one hand" and then raising his left and saying "And here is another", then concluding that there are at least two external objects in the world, and therefore that he knows (by this argument) that an external world exists. Not surprisingly, not everyone inclined to sceptical doubts found Moore's method of argument entirely convincing; Moore, however, defends his argument on the grounds that sceptical arguments seem invariably to require an appeal to "philosophical intuitions" that we have considerably less reason to accept than we have for the common sense claims that they supposedly refute. (In addition to fueling Moore's own work, the "Here is one hand" argument also deeply influenced Wittgenstein, who spent his last years working out a new approach to Moore's argument in the remarks that were published posthumously as On Certainty.)

Moore's paradox

Moore is also remembered for drawing attention to the peculiar inconsistency involved in uttering a sentence such as "It is raining, but I do not believe it is raining", a puzzle now commonly called "Moore's paradox". The puzzle arises because it seems impossible for anyone to consistently assert such a sentence; but there doesn't seem to be any logical contradiction between "It is raining" and "I don't believe that it is raining", because the former is a statement about the weather and the latter a statement about a person's belief about the weather, and it is perfectly logically possible that it may rain whilst a person does not believe that it is raining.

In addition to Moore's own work on the paradox, the puzzle also inspired a great deal of work by Ludwig Wittgenstein, who described the paradox as the most impressive philosophical insight that Moore had ever introduced. It is said that when Wittgenstein first heard this paradox one evening (which Moore had earlier stated in a lecture), he rushed round to Moore's lodgings, got him out of bed and insisted that Moore repeat the entire lecture to him.

Organic wholes

Moore's description of the principle of organic unity is extremely straightforward, nonetheless, and a variant on a pattern that began with Aristotle:

The value of a whole must not be assumed to be the same as the sum of the values of its parts (Principia, § 18).

According to Moore, a moral actor cannot survey the 'goodness' inherent in the various parts of a situation, assign a value to each of them, and then generate a sum in order to get an idea of its total value. A moral scenario is a complex assembly of parts, and its total value is often created by the relations between those parts, and not by their individual value. The organic metaphor is thus very appropriate: biological organisms seem to have emergent properties which cannot be found anywhere in their individual parts. For example, a human brain seems to exhibit a capacity for thought when none of its neurons exhibit any such capacity. In the same way, a moral scenario can have a value far greater than the sum of its component parts.

To understand the application of the organic principle to questions of value, it is perhaps best to consider Moore's primary example, that of a consciousness experiencing a beautiful object. To see how the principle works, a thinker engages in "reflective isolation", the act of isolating a given concept in a kind of null-context and determining its intrinsic value. In our example, we can easily see that, of themselves, beautiful objects and consciousnesses are not particularly valuable things. They might have some value, but when we consider the total value of a consciousness experiencing a beautiful object, it seems to exceed the simple sum of these values. Hence the value of a whole must not be assumed to be the same as the sum of the values of its parts.

Works

The gravestone of G. E. Moore and his wife Dorothy Moore in the Ascension Parish Burial Ground, Cambridge

G. E. Moore, "The Nature of Judgment" (1899)

G. E. Moore, Principia Ethica (1903)

G. E. Moore, "Review of Franz Brentano's The Origin of the Knowledge of Right and Wrong" (1903)

G. E. Moore, "The Refutation of Idealism" (1903)

G. E. Moore, "The Nature and Reality of the Objects of Perception" (1905–6)

G. E. Moore, Ethics (1912)

G. E. Moore, "Some Judgments of Perception" (1918)

G. E. Moore, Philosophical Studies (1922) 
G. E. Moore, "The Conception of Intrinsic Value"

G. E. Moore, "The Nature of Moral Philosophy"

G. E. Moore, "Are the Characteristics of Things Universal or Particular?" (1923)

G. E. Moore, "A Defence of Common Sense" (1925)

G. E. Moore and F. P. Ramsey, Facts and Proposition (Symposium) (1927)

G. E. Moore, Some Main Problems of Philosophy (1953) 
G. E. Moore, Ch. 3, "Propositions"

G. E. Moore, Philosophical Papers (1959)
G. E. Moore, Ch. 7: "Proof of an External World"

"Margin Notes by G. E. Moore on The Works of Thomas Reid (1849: With Notes by Sir William Hamilton)".

G. E. Moore, The Early Essays, edited by Tom Regan, Temple University Press (1986).

G. E. Moore, The Elements of Ethics, edited and with an introduction by Tom Regan, Temple University Press, (1991).

G. E. Moore, On Defining "Good," in Analytic Philosophy: Classic Readings, Stamford, CT: Wadsworth, 2002, pp. 1–10. ISBN 0-534-51277-1.

References

^ James Ward (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)

^ G. E. Moore (December 15, 1919), "External and Internal Relations", Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 20 (1919–20): 40–62.

^ G. E. Moore, "The Refutation of Idealism" (1903), p. 37.

^ Robert Hanna, Kant, Science, and Human Nature. Clarendon Press, 2006, p. 60.

^ Maria van der Schaar, G. F. Stout and the Psychological Origins of Analytic Philosophy, Springer, 2013, p. viii.

^ Alice Ambrose, Morris Lazerowitz (eds.), G. E. Moore: Essays in Retrospect, Volume 3, Psychology Press, 2004, p. 25.

^ "Moore, George Edward". Preston, Aaron. Internet Encyclopedia. Iep.utm.edu. 30 December 2005. Retrieved 13 April 2011.

^ Stern, David G.; Rogers, Brian; Citron, Gabriel, eds. (2016). Wittgenstein: Lectures, Cambridge 1930–1933: From the Notes of G. E. Moore. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781316432136. Retrieved 29 April 2020.

^ Ahmed, Arif. "The Moral Sciences Club (A Short History)". Faculty of Philosophy. University of Cambridge. Retrieved 29 April 2020.

^ "Annual Reports of the Ethical Union" (1946-1967). British Humanist Association, Series: Congress Minutes and Papers, 1913-1991, File: Minute Book. London: Bishopsgate Institute Special Collections and Archives.

^ Levy, Paul (1979). Moore: G.E. Moore and the Cambridge Apostles. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. pp. 28–30. ISBN 0297775766.

^ Eminent Old Alleynians : Academe Archived 25 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine at dulwich.org.uk, accessed 24 February 2009

^ Baldwin, Tom (26 March 2004). "George Edward Moore". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Center for the Study of Language and Information (CSLI), Stanford University. Retrieved 29 October 2015.

^ Hodges, S, (1981), God's Gift: A Living History of Dulwich College, pages 87-88, (Heinemann: London)

^ "Moore, George Edward (MR892GE)". A Cambridge Alumni Database. University of Cambridge.

^ The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell (Volume I, 1872-1914), George Allen and Unwin Ltd., 1971, page 64. He added:"He had a kind of exquisite purity. I have never but once succeeded in making him tell a lie, and that was a subterfuge. 'Moore', I said, 'do you always speak the truth?' 'No' he replied. I believe this to be the only lie he ever told."

^ Moore, G. E. (1903). Principia Ethica. Cambridge: University Press. ISBN 0879754982. Retrieved 29 October 2015.

^ Monk, Ray (3 April 2020). "He was the most revered philosopher of his era. So why did GE Moore disappear from history?". Prospect. London. Retrieved 29 April 2020.

^ The Aristotelian Society – The Council

^ Baldwin, Thomas (2004). "Moore, George Edward (1873–1958)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/35090. Cite journal requires |journal= (help)

^ Yau, John (11 January 2015). "Nicholas Moore, Touched by Poetic Genius". Hyperallergic. Retrieved 29 October 2015.

^ Marshall, Nicholas (10 March 2003). "Timothy Moore". The Guardian. Retrieved 14 March 2014.

^ Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). "Metaethics". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. by Geoff Sayre-McCord.

Further reading

Levy, Paul (1979). Moore: G.E. Moore and the Cambridge Apostles. ISBN 978-0-03-053616-8.

Klemke, E. D. (1999). A Defense of Realism: Reflections on the Metaphysics of G. E. Moore. ISBN 1-57392-732-5.

Daval, René, Moore et la philosophie analytique, 1997, Presses Universitaires de France (PUF), ISBN 978-2-13-048690-9 (French)

Tom Regan. Bloomsbury’s prophet: G.E. Moore and the development of his moral philosophy, Temple University Press (1986).

External links

 Wikiquote has quotations related to: G. E. Moore

 Wikisource has original works written by or about:

G. E. Moore

Summary of life and work of G. E. Moore

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
G.E. Moore

G.E. Moore's Moral Philosophy

G. E. Moore at the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Works by G. E. Moore at Project Gutenberg

Works by or about G. E. Moore at Internet Archive

Works by G. E. Moore at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)

Trinity College Chapel

G. E. Moore and the Cambridge School of Analysis, Thomas Baldwin, The Oxford Handbook of The History of Analytic Philosophy

Open Access papers by Moore published in Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society and Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume.

Links to related articles

v

t

e

Analytic philosophy

Related articles

Areas of focus 
Epistemology

Language

Mathematics

Science

Turns 
Aretaic

Linguistic

Logic 
Classical

Mathematical

Non-classical

Philosophical

Theories 
Anti-realism

Australian realism

Descriptivist theory of names

Emotivism

Functionalism

Analytical feminism

Logical atomism

Logical positivism

Analytical Marxism

Neopragmatism

Neurophilosophy

Ordinary language

Quietism

Scientific structuralism

Sense data

Concepts 
Analysis (paradox of analysis)

Analytic–synthetic distinction

Counterfactual

Natural kind

Reflective equilibrium

Supervenience

Modality 
Actualism

Necessity

Possibility

Possible world

Realism

Rigid designator

Philosophers 
Noam Chomsky

Keith Donnellan

Paul Feyerabend

Gottlob Frege

Ian Hacking

Karl Popper

Ernest Sosa

Barry Stroud

Michael Walzer

Cambridge 
Charlie Broad

Norman Malcolm

G. E. Moore

Graham Priest

Bertrand Russell

Frank P. Ramsey

Ludwig Wittgenstein

Oxford 
G. E. M. Anscombe

J. L. Austin

A. J. Ayer

Michael Dummett

Antony Flew

Philippa Foot

Peter Geach

Paul Grice

R. M. Hare

Alasdair MacIntyre

Derek Parfit

Gilbert Ryle

John Searle

P. F. Strawson

Richard Swinburne

Charles Taylor

Bernard Williams

Timothy Williamson

Logical positivists 
Ernest Nagel

Berlin Circle 
Carl Gustav Hempel

Hans Reichenbach

Vienna Circle 
Rudolf Carnap

Kurt Gödel

Otto Neurath

Moritz Schlick

Harvard 
Roderick Chisholm

Donald Davidson

Daniel Dennett

Nelson Goodman

Christine Korsgaard

Thomas Kuhn

Thomas Nagel

Robert Nozick

Hilary Putnam

W. V. O. Quine

John Rawls

Pittsburgh School 
Robert Brandom

Patricia Churchland

Paul Churchland

Adolf Grünbaum

John McDowell

Ruth Millikan

Nicholas Rescher

Wilfrid Sellars

Bas van Fraassen

Princeton 
Jerry Fodor

David Lewis

Jaegwon Kim

Saul Kripke

Richard Rorty

Notre Dame 
Robert Audi

Peter van Inwagen

Alvin Plantinga

Australian 
David Chalmers

J. L. Mackie

Peter Singer

J. J. C. Smart

Quietism 
James F. Conant

Alice Crary

Cora Diamond

 Category

 Index

v

t

e

Metaphysics

Metaphysicians 
Parmenides

Plato

Aristotle

Plotinus

Duns Scotus

Thomas Aquinas

Francisco Suárez

Nicolas Malebranche

René Descartes

John Locke

David Hume

Thomas Reid

Immanuel Kant

Isaac Newton

Arthur Schopenhauer

Baruch Spinoza

Georg W. F. Hegel

George Berkeley

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz

Christian Wolff

Bernard Bolzano

Hermann Lotze

Henri Bergson

Friedrich Nietzsche

Charles Sanders Peirce

Joseph Maréchal

Ludwig Wittgenstein

Martin Heidegger

Alfred N. Whitehead

Bertrand Russell

Dorothy Emmet

G. E. Moore

Jean-Paul Sartre

Gilbert Ryle

Hilary Putnam

P. F. Strawson

R. G. Collingwood

Rudolf Carnap

Saul Kripke

W. V. O. Quine

G. E. M. Anscombe

Donald Davidson

Michael Dummett

D. M. Armstrong

David Lewis

Alvin Plantinga

Héctor-Neri Castañeda

Peter van Inwagen

Derek Parfit

Alexius Meinong

Ernst Mally

Edward N. Zalta

more ...

Theories 
Abstract object theory

Action theory

Anti-realism

Determinism

Dualism

Enactivism

Essentialism

Existentialism

Free will

Idealism

Libertarianism

Liberty

Materialism

Meaning of life

Monism

Naturalism

Nihilism

Phenomenalism

Realism

Physicalism

Platonic idealism

Relativism

Scientific realism

Solipsism

Subjectivism

Substance theory

Truthmaker theory

Type theory

Concepts 
Abstract object

Anima mundi

Being

Category of being

Causality

Causal closure

Choice

Cogito, ergo sum

Concept

Embodied cognition

Essence

Existence

Experience

Hypostatic abstraction

Idea

Identity

Information

Insight

Intelligence

Intention

Linguistic modality

Matter

Meaning

Memetics

Mental representation

Mind

Motion

Nature

Necessity

Notion

Object

Pattern

Perception

Physical object

Principle

Property

Qualia

Quality

Reality

Relation

Soul

Subject

Substantial form

Thought

Time

Truth

Type–token distinction

Universal

Unobservable

Value

more ...

Related topics 
Axiology

Cosmology

Epistemology

Feminist metaphysics

Interpretations of quantum mechanics

Mereology

Meta-

Ontology

Philosophy of mind

Philosophy of psychology

Philosophy of self

Philosophy of space and time

Teleology

Theoretical physics

 Category

 Philosophy portal

v

t

e

Epistemology

Epistemologists 
Thomas Aquinas

Augustine of Hippo

William Alston

Robert Audi

A. J. Ayer

George Berkeley

Laurence BonJour

Keith DeRose

René Descartes

John Dewey

Fred Dretske

Edmund Gettier

Alvin Goldman

Nelson Goodman

Paul Grice

Anil Gupta

Susan Haack

David Hume

Immanuel Kant

Søren Kierkegaard

Peter Klein

Saul Kripke

Hilary Kornblith

David Lewis

John Locke

G. E. Moore

John McDowell

Robert Nozick

Alvin Plantinga

Plato

Duncan Pritchard

James Pryor

Hilary Putnam

W. V. O. Quine

Thomas Reid

Bertrand Russell

Gilbert Ryle

Wilfrid Sellars

Susanna Siegel

Ernest Sosa

P. F. Strawson

Baruch Spinoza

Timothy Williamson

Ludwig Wittgenstein

Nicholas Wolterstorff

Vienna Circle

more...

Theories 
Coherentism

Constructivism

Contextualism

Empiricism

Evolutionary epistemology

Fallibilism

Feminist epistemology

Fideism

Foundationalism

Holism

Infinitism

Innatism

Naïve realism

Naturalized epistemology

Phenomenalism

Positivism

Rationalism

Reductionism

Reliabilism

Representational realism

Skepticism

Transcendental idealism

Concepts 
A priori knowledge

A posteriori knowledge

Analysis

Analytic–synthetic distinction

Belief

Common sense

Descriptive knowledge

Exploratory thought

Gettier problem

Induction

Internalism and externalism

Justification

Knowledge

Objectivity

Privileged access

Problem of induction

Problem of other minds

Perception

Procedural knowledge

Proposition

Regress argument

Simplicity

Speculative reason

Truth

more...

Related articles 
Outline of epistemology

Faith and rationality

Formal epistemology

Meta-epistemology

Philosophy of perception

Philosophy of science

Social epistemology

Category

Task Force

Stubs

Discussion

v

t

e

Philosophy of mind

Theories 
Behaviorism (Radical)

Biological naturalism

Cognitive psychology

Computationalism

Mind–body dualism

Eliminative materialism

Emergent materialism

Emergentism

Epiphenomenalism

Functionalism

Idealism

Interactionism

Materialism

Monism

Naïve realism
Neurophenomenology

Neutral monism

Occasionalism

Panpsychism

Psychoanalysis

Parallelism

Phenomenalism

Phenomenology

Physicalism
identity theory

Property dualism

Representational

Solipsism

Substance dualism

Concepts 
Abstract object

Artificial intelligence

Chinese room

Cognition

Cognitive closure

Concept

Concept and object

Consciousness

Hard problem of consciousness

Hypostatic abstraction

Idea

Identity

Ingenuity

Intelligence

Intentionality

Introspection

Intuition

Language of thought

Materialism

Mental event

Mental image

Mental property

Mental representation

Mind

Mind–body problem
Non-physical entity

New mysterianism

Pain

Privileged access

Problem of other minds

Propositional attitude

Qualia

Tabula rasa

Understanding

Zombie

more...

Related topics 
Metaphysics

Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self

Category

Philosophers category

Project

Task Force

 Philosophy portal

v

t

e

Ethics

Theories 
Casuistry

Consequentialism

Deontology
Kantian ethics

Ethics of care

Existentialist ethics

Meta-ethics

Particularism

Pragmatic ethics

Role ethics

Virtue ethics

Concepts 
Autonomy

Axiology

Belief

Conscience

Consent

Equality

Care

Free will

Good and evil
Good

Evil

Happiness

Ideal

Immorality

Justice

Liberty

Morality

Norm

Freedom

Principles

Suffering or Pain

Stewardship

Sympathy

Trust

Value

Virtue

Worldview

Wrong

full index...

Philosophers 
Laozi

Socrates

Plato

Aristotle

Diogenes

Valluvar

Cicero

Confucius

Augustine of Hippo

Mencius

Mozi

Xunzi

Thomas Aquinas

Baruch Spinoza

David Hume

Immanuel Kant

Georg W. F. Hegel

Arthur Schopenhauer

Jeremy Bentham

John Stuart Mill

Søren Kierkegaard

Henry Sidgwick

Friedrich Nietzsche

G. E. Moore

Karl Barth

Paul Tillich

Dietrich Bonhoeffer

Philippa Foot

John Rawls

John Dewey

Bernard Williams

J. L. Mackie

G. E. M. Anscombe

William Frankena

Alasdair MacIntyre

R. M. Hare

Peter Singer

Derek Parfit

Thomas Nagel

Robert Merrihew Adams

Charles Taylor

Joxe Azurmendi

Christine Korsgaard

Martha Nussbaum

more...

Applied ethics 
Bioethics

Business ethics

Discourse ethics

Engineering ethics

Environmental ethics

Legal ethics

Machine ethics

Media ethics

Medical ethics

Nursing ethics

Professional ethics

Sexual ethics

Ethics of eating meat

Ethics of technology

Ethics of terraforming

Meta-ethics 
Cognitivism
Moral realism
Ethical naturalism

Ethical non-naturalism

Ethical subjectivism
Ideal observer theory

Divine command theory

Error theory

Non-cognitivism
Emotivism

Quasi-realism

Universal prescriptivism

Moral universalism
Value monism – Value pluralism

Moral relativism

Moral nihilism

Empiricism

Moral rationalism

Ethical intuitionism

Moral skepticism

Related articles 
Christian ethics

Descriptive ethics

Ethics in religion

Evolutionary ethics

Feminist ethics

History of ethics

Ideology

Islamic ethics

Jewish ethics

Moral psychology

Normative ethics

Philosophy of law

Political philosophy

Population ethics

Social philosophy

 Category

Authority control 
BNE: XX4579116

BNF: cb12034164j (data)

CANTIC: a10126375

GND: 118583859

ISNI: 0000 0001 2142 8290

LCCN: n78087053

NDL: 00450423

NKC: jn20000604072

NLA: 36071342

NLG: 158289

NLK: KAC199619240

NTA: 06884333X

SELIBR: 249490

SNAC: w6sj2zps

SUDOC: 028522230

Trove: 1206696

VIAF: 88634979

 WorldCat Identities: lccn-n78087053
