"This article is about the holiday. For the peace deal, see Good Friday Agreement. For other uses, see Good Friday (disambiguation).

Good Friday

A Stabat Mater depiction, 1868

Type Christian

Significance Commemorates the crucifixion and death of Jesus Christ

Celebrations No traditional celebrations

Observances Worship services, prayer and vigil services, fasting, almsgiving

Date The Friday immediately preceding Easter Sunday

2019 date April 19 (Western)

April 26 (Eastern)

2020 date April 10 (Western)

April 17 (Eastern)

2021 date April 2 (Western)

April 30 (Eastern)

2022 date April 15 (Western)

April 22 (Eastern)

Frequency Annual

Related to Passover, Christmas (which celebrates the birth of Jesus), Septuagesima, Quinquagesima, Shrove Tuesday, Ash Wednesday, Lent, Palm Sunday, Spy Wednesday, Maundy Thursday, and Holy Saturday which lead up to Easter, Easter Sunday (primarily), Divine Mercy Sunday, Ascension, Pentecost, Whit Monday, Trinity Sunday, Corpus Christi and Feast of the Sacred Heart which follow it. It is related to the Feast of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross, which focuses on the benefits, graces, and merits of the Cross, rather than Jesus's death.

Good Friday is a Christian holiday commemorating the crucifixion of Jesus and his death at Calvary. It is observed during Holy Week as part of the Paschal Triduum on the Friday preceding Easter Sunday, and may coincide with the Jewish observance of Passover. It is also known as Holy Friday, Great Friday, and Black Friday.

Members of many Christian denominations, including the Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Lutheran, Anglican, Methodist, Oriental Orthodox and Reformed traditions, observe Good Friday with fasting and church services. Communicants of the Moravian Church have a Good Friday tradition of cleaning gravestones in Moravian cemetaries. 

The date of Good Friday varies from one year to the next on both the Gregorian and Julian calendars. Eastern and Western Christianity disagree over the computation of the date of Easter and therefore of Good Friday. Good Friday is a widely instituted legal holiday around the world, including in most Western countries and 12 U.S. states. Some countries, such as Germany, have laws prohibiting certain acts, such as dancing and horse racing, that are seen as profaning the solemn nature of the day.

Contents

1 Name

1.1 Etymology

1.2 Other languages

2 Biblical accounts

3 In Eastern and Oriental Orthodox Christianity

3.1 Matins of Holy and Great Friday

3.2 Royal Hours

3.3 Vespers of Holy and Great Friday

3.4 Matins of Holy and Great Saturday

4 In the Roman Catholic Church

4.1 Day of Fasting

4.2 Services on the day

4.3 Three Hours' Agony

4.4 Liturgy

4.5 Stations of the Cross

4.6 Acts of Reparation to Jesus Christ

4.7 Novena to the Divine Mercy

5 Anglican Communion

6 Lutheran Church

7 Methodist Church

8 Moravian Church

9 Reformed Churches

10 Other Christian traditions

11 Associated customs

11.1 Australia and New Zealand

11.2 Canada

11.3 Cuba

11.4 Hong Kong

11.5 Ireland

11.6 Malaysia

11.7 Malta

11.8 Philippines

11.9 Spain

11.10 United Kingdom

11.11 United States

12 Calculating the date

13 Cultural references

14 Criticism from non-observers

15 See also

16 References

17 Further reading

18 External links

Name

Etymology

"Good Friday" comes from the obsolete sense "pious, holy" of the word "good". Less common examples of expressions based on this obsolete sense of "good" include "the good book" for the Bible, "good tide" for "Christmas" or Shrovetide, and Good Wednesday for the Wednesday in Holy Week.

A common folk etymology incorrectly analyzes "Good Friday" as a corruption of "God Friday" similar to the linguistically correct description of "goodbye" as a contraction of "God be with you". In Old English, the day was called “Long Friday” ("Langa frigedæg" ), and this term was adopted from Old English and is still used in Scandinavian languages and Finnish.

Other languages

In Latin, the name used by the Catholic Church until 1955 was Feria sexta in Parasceve ("Friday of Preparation "). In the 1955 reform of Holy Week, it was renamed Feria sexta in Passione et Morte Domini ("Friday of the Passion and Death of the Lord"), and in the new rite introduced in 1970, shortened to Feria sexta in Passione Domini ("Friday of the Passion of the Lord").

In Dutch, Good Friday is known as Goede Vrijdag, in Frisian as Goedfreed. In German-speaking countries, it is generally referred to as Karfreitag ("Mourning Friday", with Kar from Old High German kara‚ "bewail", "grieve"‚ "mourn", which is related to the English word "care" in the sense of cares and woes), but it is sometimes also called Stiller Freitag ("Silent Friday") and Hoher Freitag ("High Friday, Holy Friday"). In the Scandinavian languages and Finnish ("pitkäperjantai"), it is called the equivalent of "Long Friday" as it was in Old English ("Langa frigedæg").

In Greek, Polish, Hungarian, and Romanian it is generally referred to as the equivalent of "Great Friday" (Μεγάλη Παρασκευή, Wielki Piątek, Nagypéntek, Vinerea Mare). In Bulgarian, it is called either Велики петък ("Great Friday"), or, more commonly, Разпети петък ("Crucified Friday"). In French and Spanish it is referred to as Vendredi saint and Viernes Santo ("Holy Friday"). In Arabic, it is known as "الجمعة العظيمة" ("Great Friday").

Biblical accounts

Main articles: Passion, Crucifixion of Jesus, and Sayings of Jesus on the cross

The Judas Kiss by Gustave Doré, 1866

 Part of a series on

Death and Resurrection of Jesus

Passion

Last Supper

Arrest

Trial
Pilate's court

Flagellation

Mocking

Crown of thorns

Via Dolorosa

Crucifixion and Death

Burial

Resurrection
Empty tomb

Appearances
Noli me tangere

Road to Emmaus

Great Commission

Ascension

Holy Week

Palm Sunday

Spy Wednesday

Maundy Thursday

Good Friday

Holy Saturday

Easter Sunday

Significance

Session of Christ

Salvation

Jewish eschatology

Christian eschatology

Visions of Jesus

Vision theory

Visions

Religious experience

Empty tomb fringe theories

Stolen body

Swoon

Lost body

Twin

Related

Instrument of crucifixion

Crucifixion darkness

Conversion of Paul the Apostle

Roza Bal

Talpiot Tomb

Islamic view

Portals: Christianity Bible

v

t

e

According to the accounts in the Gospels, the royal soldiers, guided by Jesus' disciple Judas Iscariot, arrested Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane. Judas received money (30 pieces of silver) (Matthew 26:14–16) for betraying Jesus and told the guards that whomever he kisses is the one they are to arrest. Following his arrest, Jesus was taken to the house of Annas, the father-in-law of the high priest, Caiaphas. There he was interrogated with little result and sent bound to Caiaphas the high priest where the Sanhedrin had assembled (John 18:1–24).

Conflicting testimony against Jesus was brought forth by many witnesses, to which Jesus answered nothing. Finally the high priest adjured Jesus to respond under solemn oath, saying "I adjure you, by the Living God, to tell us, are you the Anointed One, the Son of God?" Jesus testified ambiguously, "You have said it, and in time you will see the Son of Man seated at the right hand of the Almighty, coming on the clouds of Heaven." The high priest condemned Jesus for blasphemy, and the Sanhedrin concurred with a sentence of death (Matthew 26:57–66). Peter, waiting in the courtyard, also denied Jesus three times to bystanders while the interrogations were proceeding just as Jesus had predicted.

In the morning, the whole assembly brought Jesus to the Roman governor Pontius Pilate under charges of subverting the nation, opposing taxes to Caesar, and making himself a king (Luke 23:1–2). Pilate authorized the Jewish leaders to judge Jesus according to their own law and execute sentencing; however, the Jewish leaders replied that they were not allowed by the Romans to carry out a sentence of death (John 18:31).

Pilate questioned Jesus and told the assembly that there was no basis for sentencing. Upon learning that Jesus was from Galilee, Pilate referred the case to the ruler of Galilee, King Herod, who was in Jerusalem for the Passover Feast. Herod questioned Jesus but received no answer; Herod sent Jesus back to Pilate. Pilate told the assembly that neither he nor Herod found Jesus to be guilty; Pilate resolved to have Jesus whipped and released (Luke 23:3–16). Under the guidance of the chief priests, the crowd asked for Barabbas, who had been imprisoned for committing murder during an insurrection. Pilate asked what they would have him do with Jesus, and they demanded, "Crucify him" (Mark 15:6–14). Pilate's wife had seen Jesus in a dream earlier that day, and she forewarned Pilate to "have nothing to do with this righteous man" (Matthew 27:19). Pilate had Jesus flogged and then brought him out to the crowd to release him. The chief priests informed Pilate of a new charge, demanding Jesus be sentenced to death "because he claimed to be God's son." This possibility filled Pilate with fear, and he brought Jesus back inside the palace and demanded to know from where he came (John 19:1–9).

Antonio Ciseri's depiction of Ecce Homo with Jesus and Pontius Pilate, 19th century

Coming before the crowd one last time, Pilate declared Jesus innocent and washed his own hands in water to show he had no part in this condemnation. Nevertheless, Pilate handed Jesus over to be crucified in order to forestall a riot (Matthew 27:24–26) and ultimately to keep his job. The sentence written was "Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews." Jesus carried his cross to the site of execution (assisted by Simon of Cyrene), called the "place of the Skull", or "Golgotha" in Hebrew and in Latin "Calvary". There he was crucified along with two criminals (John 19:17–22).

Jesus agonized on the cross for six hours. During his last three hours on the cross, from noon to 3 pm, darkness fell over the whole land. Jesus spoke from the cross, quoting the messianic Psalm 22: "My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?"

With a loud cry, Jesus gave up his spirit. There was an earthquake, tombs broke open, and the curtain in the Temple was torn from top to bottom. The centurion on guard at the site of crucifixion declared, "Truly this was God's Son!" (Matthew 27:45–54)

Joseph of Arimathea, a member of the Sanhedrin and a secret follower of Jesus, who had not consented to his condemnation, went to Pilate to request the body of Jesus (Luke 23:50–52). Another secret follower of Jesus and member of the Sanhedrin named Nicodemus brought about a hundred-pound weight mixture of spices and helped wrap the body of Jesus (John 19:39–40). Pilate asked confirmation from the centurion of whether Jesus was dead (Mark 15:44). A soldier pierced the side of Jesus with a lance causing blood and water to flow out (John 19:34), and the centurion informed Pilate that Jesus was dead (Mark 15:45).

Joseph of Arimathea took Jesus' body, wrapped it in a clean linen shroud, and placed it in his own new tomb that had been carved in the rock (Matthew 27:59–60) in a garden near the site of the crucifixion. Nicodemus (John 3:1) also brought 75 pounds of myrrh and aloes, and placed them in the linen with the body, in keeping with Jewish burial customs (John 19:39–40). They rolled a large rock over the entrance of the tomb (Matthew 27:60). Then they returned home and rested, because Shabbat had begun at sunset (Luke 23:54–56). Matt. 28:1 "After the Shabbat, at dawn on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary went to look at the tomb". i.e. "After the Sabbath, at dawn on the first day of the week,...". "He is not here; he has risen, just as he said....". (Matt. 28:6)

In Eastern and Oriental Orthodox Christianity

Icon of the Crucifixion, 16th century, by Theophanes the Cretan (Stavronikita Monastery, Mount Athos)

Byzantine Christians (Eastern Christians who follow the Rite of Constantinople: Orthodox Christians and Greek-Catholics) call this day "Great and Holy Friday", or simply "Great Friday".

Because the sacrifice of Jesus through his crucifixion is recalled on this day, the Divine Liturgy (the sacrifice of bread and wine) is never celebrated on Great Friday, except when this day coincides with the Great Feast of the Annunciation, which falls on the fixed date of 25 March (for those churches which follow the traditional Julian Calendar, 25 March currently falls on 7 April of the modern Gregorian Calendar). Also on Great Friday, the clergy no longer wear the purple or red that is customary throughout Great Lent, but instead don black vestments. There is no "stripping of the altar" on Holy and Great Thursday as in the West; instead, all of the church hangings are changed to black, and will remain so until the Divine Liturgy on Great Saturday.

The faithful revisit the events of the day through the public reading of specific Psalms and the Gospels, and singing hymns about Christ's death. Rich visual imagery and symbolism, as well as stirring hymnody, are remarkable elements of these observances. In the Orthodox understanding, the events of Holy Week are not simply an annual commemoration of past events, but the faithful actually participates in the death and the resurrection of Jesus.

Each hour of this day is the new suffering and the new effort of the expiatory suffering of the Savior. And the echo of this suffering is already heard in every word of our worship service – unique and incomparable both in the power of tenderness and feeling and in the depth of the boundless compassion for the suffering of the Savior. The Holy Church opens before the eyes of believers a full picture of the redeeming suffering of the Lord beginning with the bloody sweat in the Garden of Gethsemane up to the crucifixion on Golgotha. Taking us back through the past centuries in thought, the Holy Church brings us to the foot of the cross of Christ erected on Golgotha and makes us present among the quivering spectators of all the torture of the Savior.

Great and Holy Friday is observed as a strict fast, also called the Black Fast, and adult Byzantine Christians are expected to abstain from all food and drink the entire day to the extent that their health permits. "On this Holy day neither a meal is offered nor do we eat on this day of the crucifixion. If someone is unable or has become very old  unable to fast, he may be given bread and water after sunset. In this way we come to the holy commandment of the Holy Apostles not to eat on Great Friday."

Matins of Holy and Great Friday

The Byzantine Christian observance of Holy and Great Friday, which is formally known as The Order of Holy and Saving Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, begins on Thursday night with the Matins of the Twelve Passion Gospels. Scattered throughout this Matins service are twelve readings from all four of the Gospels which recount the events of the Passion from the Last Supper through the Crucifixion and burial of Jesus. Some churches have a candelabrum with twelve candles on it, and after each Gospel reading one of the candles is extinguished.

Good Friday cross from the Catholicon at Holy Trinity Monastery, Meteora, Greece

The first of these twelve readings John 13:31–18:1 is the longest Gospel reading of the liturgical year, and is a concatenation from all four Gospels. Just before the sixth Gospel reading, which recounts Jesus being nailed to the cross, a large cross is carried out of the sanctuary by the priest, accompanied by incense and candles, and is placed in the center of the nave (where the congregation gathers)Sēmeron Kremātai Epí Xýlou:

Today He who hung the earth upon the waters is hung upon the Cross (three times).

He who is King of the angels is arrayed in a crown of thorns.

He who wraps the Heavens in clouds is wrapped in the purple of mockery.

He who in Jordan set Adam free receives blows upon His face.

The Bridegroom of the Church is transfixed with nails.

The Son of the Virgin is pierced with a spear.

We venerate Thy Passion, O Christ (three times).

Show us also Thy glorious Resurrection.

The readings are:

John 13:31–18:1 – Christ's last sermon, Jesus prays for the apostles.

John 18:1–28 – The agony in the garden, the mockery and denial of Christ.

Matthew 26:57–75 – The mockery of Christ, Peter denies Christ.

John 18:28–19:16 – Pilate questions Jesus; Jesus is condemned; Jesus is mocked by the Romans.

Matthew 27:3–32 – Judas commits suicide; Jesus is condemned; Jesus mocked by the Romans; Simon of Cyrene compelled to carry the cross.

Mark 15:16–32 – Jesus dies.

Matthew 27:33–54 – Jesus dies.

Luke 23:32–49 – Jesus dies.

John 19:25–37 – Jesus dies.

Mark 15:43–47 – Joseph of Arimathea buries Christ.

John 19:38–42 – Joseph of Arimathea buries Christ.

Matthew 27:62–66 – The Jews set a guard.

During the service, all come forward to kiss the feet of Christ on the cross. After the Canon, a brief, moving hymn, The Wise Thief is chanted by singers who stand at the foot of the cross in the center of the nave. The service does not end with the First Hour, as usual, but with a special dismissal by the priest:

May Christ our true God, Who for the salvation of the world endured spitting, and scourging, and buffeting, and the Cross, and death, through the intercessions of His most pure Mother, of our holy and God-bearing fathers, and of all the saints, have mercy on us and save us, for He is good and the Lover of mankind.

Royal Hours

Vigil during the Service of the Royal Hours.

Main article: Royal Hours

The next day, in the forenoon on Friday, all gather again to pray the Royal Hours, a special expanded celebration of the Little Hours (including the First Hour, Third Hour, Sixth Hour, Ninth Hour and Typica) with the addition of scripture readings (Old Testament, Epistle and Gospel) and hymns about the Crucifixion at each of the Hours (some of the material from the previous night is repeated). This is somewhat more festive in character, and derives its name of "Royal" from both the fact that the Hours are served with more solemnity than normal, commemorating Christ the King who humbled himself for the salvation of mankind, and also from the fact that this service was in the past attended by the Emperor and his court.

Vespers of Holy and Great Friday

The crucified Christ, just before the Deposition from the Cross and the placing of the Epitaphios in the Sepulcher.

In the afternoon, around 3 pm, all gather for the Vespers of the Taking-Down from the Cross, commemorating the Deposition from the Cross. The Gospel reading is a concatenation taken from all four of the Gospels. During the service, the body of Christ (the soma) is removed from the cross, as the words in the Gospel reading mention Joseph of Arimathea, wrapped in a linen shroud, and taken to the altar in the sanctuary.

The epitaphios ("winding sheet"), depicting the preparation of the body of Jesus for burial

Near the end of the service an epitaphios or "winding sheet" (a cloth embroidered with the image of Christ prepared for burial) is carried in procession to a low table in the nave which represents the Tomb of Christ; it is often decorated with an abundance of flowers. The epitaphios itself represents the body of Jesus wrapped in a burial shroud, and is a roughly full-size cloth icon of the body of Christ. Then the priest may deliver a homily and everyone comes forward to venerate the epitaphios. In the Slavic practice, at the end of Vespers, Compline is immediately served, featuring a special Canon of the Crucifixion of our Lord and the Lamentation of the Most Holy Theotokos by Symeon the Logothete.

Matins of Holy and Great Saturday

The Epitaphios being carried in procession in a church in Greece.

On Friday night, the Matins of Holy and Great Saturday, a unique service known as The Lamentation at the Tomb (Epitáphios Thrēnos) is celebrated. This service is also sometimes called Jerusalem Matins. Much of the service takes place around the tomb of Christ in the center of the nave.

A unique feature of the service is the chanting of the Lamentations or Praises (Enkōmia), which consist of verses chanted by the clergy interspersed between the verses of Psalm 119 (which is, by far, the longest psalm in the Bible). The Enkōmia are the best-loved hymns of Byzantine hymnography, both their poetry and their music being uniquely suited to each other and to the spirit of the day. They consist of 185 tercet antiphons arranged in three parts (stáseis or "stops"), which are interjected with the verses of Psalm 119, and nine short doxastiká ("Gloriae") and Theotókia (invocations to the Virgin Mary). The three stáseis are each set to its own music, and are commonly known by their initial antiphons: Ἡ ζωὴ ἐν τάφῳ, "Life in a grave", Ἄξιον ἐστί, "Worthy it is", and Αἱ γενεαὶ πᾶσαι, "All the generations". Musically they can be classified as strophic, with 75, 62, and 48 tercet stanzas each, respectively. The climax of the Enkōmia comes during the third stásis, with the antiphon "Ō glyký mou Éar", a lamentation of the Virgin for her dead Child ("O, my sweet spring, my sweetest child, where has your beauty gone?"). The author(s) and date of the Enkōmia are unknown. Their High Attic linguistic style suggests a dating around the 6th century, possibly before the time of St. Romanos the Melodist.

The Epitaphios mounted upon return of procession, at an Orthodox Church in Adelaide, Australia.

At the end of the Great Doxology, while the Trisagion is sung, the epitaphios is taken in procession around the outside the church, and is then returned to the tomb. Some churches observe the practice of holding the epitaphios at the door, above waist level, so the faithful most bow down under it as they come back into the church, symbolizing their entering into the death and resurrection of Christ. The epitaphios will lay in the tomb until the Paschal Service early Sunday morning. In some churches, the epitaphios is never left alone, but is accompanied 24 hours a day by a reader chanting from the Psalter.

The Troparion (hymn of the day) of Good Friday is:

The noble Joseph, when he had taken down Thy most pure Body from the tree, wrapped it in fine linen, and anointed it with spices, and placed it in a new tomb.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, both now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

The angel came to the myrrh-bearing women at the tomb and said:

Myrrh is fitting for the dead, but Christ has shown Himself a stranger to corruption.

In the Roman Catholic Church

Day of Fasting

Crucifix prepared for veneration

The Catholic Church regards Good Friday and Holy Saturday as the Paschal fast, in accord with Article 110 of Sacrosanctum Concilium. In the Latin Church, a fast day is understood as having only one full meal and two collations (a smaller repast, the two of which together do not equal the one full meal) – although this may be observed less stringently on Holy Saturday than on Good Friday.

Services on the day

The Roman Rite has no celebration of Mass between the Lord's Supper on Holy Thursday evening and the Easter Vigil unless a special exemption is granted for rare solemn or grave occasions by the Vatican or the local bishop. The only sacraments celebrated during this time are Baptism (for those in danger of death), Penance, and Anointing of the Sick. While there is no celebration of the Eucharist, it is distributed to the faithful only in the Service of the Passion of the Lord, but can also be taken at any hour to the sick who are unable to attend this service. After the Lord's Supper any candlesticks and altar cloths, cross or crosses are removed leaving it bare so that they may be returned in-ceremony on Easter Sunday which memorialises the day of Christ's resurrection. It is also customary to empty the holy water fonts in preparation of the blessing of the water at the Easter Vigil. Traditionally, no bells are rung on Good Friday or Holy Saturday until the Easter Vigil.

The Celebration of the Passion of the Lord takes place in the afternoon, ideally at three o'clock; however, for pastoral reasons (especially in countries where Good Friday is not a public holiday), it is permissible to celebrate the liturgy earlier, even shortly after midday, or at a later hour up until 9pm.

The vestments used are red (more commonly) or black (more traditionally). Before 1970, vestments were black except for the Communion part of the rite when violet was used. Before the reforms of the Holy Week Liturgies in 1955, black was used throughout. Before the 1955 Holy Week Reforms, Holy Communion was not distributed to the faithful on Good Friday. If a bishop or abbot celebrates, he wears a plain mitre (mitra simplex).

Three Hours' Agony

Main article: Three Hours' Agony

The Three Hours' Devotion based on the Seven Last Words from the Cross begins at noon and ends at 3 pm, the time that the Christian tradition teaches that Jesus died on the cross.

Liturgy

See also: Good Friday prayer for the Jews

Communion from the Blessed Sacrament on Good Friday (Our Lady of Lourdes, Philadelphia)

The Good Friday liturgy consists of three parts: the Liturgy of the Word, the Veneration of the Cross, and Holy Communion.

The Liturgy of the Word consists of the clergy and assisting ministers entering in complete silence, without any singing. They then silently make a full prostration. This signifies the abasement (the fall) of (earthly) humans. It also symbolizes the grief and sorrow of the Church. Then follows the Collect prayer, and the reading or chanting of Isaiah 52:13–53:12, Hebrews 4:14–16, 5:7–9, and the Passion account from the Gospel of John, traditionally divided between three deacons, yet usually divided between the celebrant, one or two singers or readers, and the congregation which speaks the part of the "crowd". In the older form of the Mass known as the Tridentine Mass the readings for Good Friday are taken from Exodus 12:1-11 and the Gospel according to St. John 18:1-40; 19:1-42.

The Great Intercessions also known as orationes sollemnes immediately follows the Liturgy of the Word and consists of a series of prayers for the Church, the Pope, the clergy and laity of the Church, those preparing for baptism, the unity of Christians, the Jewish people, those who do not believe in Christ, those who do not believe in God, those in public office, and those in special need. After each prayer intention, the deacon calls the faithful to kneel for a short period of private prayer; the celebrant then sums up the prayer intention with a Collect-style prayer. As part of the pre-1955 Holy Week Liturgy, the kneeling was omitted only for the prayer for the Jews.

The Adoration of the Cross has a crucifix, not necessarily the one that is normally on or near the altar at other times of the year, solemnly unveiled and displayed to the congregation, and then venerated by them, individually if possible and usually by kissing the wood of the cross, while hymns and the Improperia ("Reproaches") with the Trisagion hymn are chanted.

Holy Communion is done according to a rite based on that of the final part of Mass, beginning with the Our Father, but omitting the ceremony of "Breaking of the Bread" and its related chant, the "Agnus Dei". The Eucharist, consecrated at the Evening Mass of the Lord's Supper on Holy Thursday, is distributed at this service. Before the Holy Week reforms of Pope Pius XII in 1955, only the priest received Communion in the framework of what was called the "Mass of the Presanctified", which included the usual Offertory prayers, with the placing of wine in the chalice, but which omitted the Canon of the Mass. The priest and people then depart in silence, and the altar cloth is removed, leaving the altar bare except for the crucifix and two or four candlesticks.

Stations of the Cross

The Way of the Cross, celebrated at the Colosseum in Rome on Good Friday

Rome: canopy erected at the "Temple of Venus and Rome" during the "Way of the Cross" ceremony

In addition to the prescribed liturgical service, the Stations of the Cross are often prayed either in the church or outside, and a prayer service may be held from midday to 3.00 pm, known as the Three Hours' Agony. In countries such as Malta, Italy, Philippines, Puerto Rico and Spain, processions with statues representing the Passion of Christ are held.

In Rome, since the papacy of John Paul II, the heights of the Temple of Venus and Roma and their position opposite the main entrance to the Colosseum have been used to good effect as a public address platform. This may be seen in the photograph below where a red canopy has been erected to shelter the Pope as well as an illuminated cross, on the occasion of the Way of the Cross ceremony. The Pope, either personally or through a representative, leads the faithful through meditations on the stations of the cross while a cross is carried from there to the Colosseum.

In Polish churches, a tableau of Christ's Tomb is unveiled in the sanctuary. Many of the faithful spend long hours into the night grieving at the Tomb, where it is customary to kiss the wounds on the Lord's body. A life-size figure of Jesus lying in his tomb is widely visited by the faithful, especially on Holy Saturday. The tableaux may include flowers, candles, figures of angels standing watch, and the three crosses atop Mt Calvary, and much more. Each parish strives to come up with the most artistically and religiously evocative arrangement in which the Blessed Sacrament, draped in a filmy veil, is prominently displayed.

Acts of Reparation to Jesus Christ

Main article: Acts of Reparation to Jesus Christ

El Greco's Jesus Carrying the Cross, 1580

The Roman Catholic tradition includes specific prayers and devotions as acts of reparation for the sufferings and insults that Jesus suffered during his Passion on Good Friday. These Acts of Reparation to Jesus Christ do not involve a petition for a beneficiary, but aim to "repair the sins" against Jesus. Some such prayers are provided in the Raccolta Catholic prayer book (approved by a Decree of 1854, and published by the Holy See in 1898) which also includes prayers as Acts of Reparation to the Virgin Mary.

In his encyclical Miserentissimus Redemptor on reparations, Pope Pius XI called Acts of Reparation to Jesus Christ a duty for Catholics and referred to them as "some sort of compensation to be rendered for the injury" with respect to the sufferings of Jesus.

Pope John Paul II referred to Acts of Reparation as the "unceasing effort to stand beside the endless crosses on which the Son of God continues to be crucified".

Novena to the Divine Mercy

The Novena to the Divine Mercy begins on that day and lasts until the Saturday before the Feast of Mercy. Both holidays are strictly connected, as the mercy of God flows from the Heart of Jesus that was pierced on the Cross.

Anglican Communion

The 1662 Book of Common Prayer did not specify a particular rite to be observed on Good Friday but local custom came to mandate an assortment of services, including the Seven Last Words from the Cross and a three-hour service consisting of Matins, Ante-communion (using the Reserved Sacrament in high church parishes) and Evensong. In recent times, revised editions of the Prayer Book and Common Worship have re-introduced pre-Reformation forms of observance of Good Friday corresponding to those in today's Roman Catholic Church, with special nods to the rites that had been observed in the Church of England prior to the Henrican, Edwardian and Elizabethan reforms, including Creeping to the Cross.

Lutheran Church

The chancel of this Lutheran church is adorned with black paraments on Good Friday, the liturgical colour associated with Good Friday in the Lutheran Churches.

In Lutheran tradition from the 16th to the 20th century, Good Friday was the most important religious holiday, and abstention from all worldly works was expected. During that time, Lutheranism had no restrictions on the celebration of the Eucharist on Good Friday; on the contrary, it was a prime day on which to receive the Eucharist, and services were often accentuated by special music such as the St Matthew Passion by Johann Sebastian Bach.

More recently, Lutheran liturgical practice has recaptured Good Friday as part of the larger sweep of the great Three Days: Maundy Thursday, Good Friday, and the Vigil of Easter. The Three Days remain one liturgy which celebrates the death and resurrection of Jesus. As part of the liturgy of the Three Days, Lutherans generally fast from the Eucharist on Good Friday. Rather, it is celebrated in remembrance of the Last Supper on Maundy Thursday and at the Vigil of Easter. One practice among Lutheran churches is to celebrate a tenebrae service on Good Friday, typically conducted in candlelight and consisting of a collection of passion accounts from the four gospels. While being called "Tenebrae" it holds little resemblance to the now-suppressed Catholic monastic rite of the same name. The Good Friday liturgy appointed in Evangelical Lutheran Worship, the worship book of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, specifies a liturgy similar to the revised Roman Catholic liturgy. A rite for adoration of the crucified Christ includes the optional singing of the Solemn Reproaches in an updated and revised translation which eliminates some of the anti-Jewish overtones in previous versions. Many Lutheran churches have Good Friday services, such as the Three Hours' Agony centered on the remembrance of the "Seven Last Words," sayings of Jesus assembled from the four gospels, while others hold a liturgy that places an emphasis on the triumph of the cross, and a singular biblical account of the Passion narrative from the Gospel of John.

Along with observing a general Lenten fast, many Lutherans emphasize the importance of Good Friday as a day of fasting within the kalendar. A Handbook for the Discipline of Lent recommends the Lutheran guideline to "Fast on Ash Wednesday and Good Friday with only one simple meal during the day, usually without meat".

Methodist Church

A United Methodist minister prostrates at the start of the Good Friday liturgy at Holy Family Church, in accordance with the rubrics in the Book of Worship. The processional cross is veiled in black, the liturgical colour associated with Good Friday in Methodist Churches.

On Maundy Thursday, the altar of this Methodist church was stripped and the crucifix of this Methodist church has been veiled in black for Good Friday (black is the liturgical colour for Good Friday in the United Methodist Church). A wooden cross sits in front of the bare chancel for the veneration of the cross ceremony, which occurs during the United Methodist Good Friday liturgy.

Many Methodist denominations commemorate Good Friday with fasting, as well as a service of worship based on the Seven Last Words from the Cross; this liturgy is known as the Three Hours Devotion as it starts at noon and concludes at 3 pm, the latter being the time that Jesus died on the cross.

Moravian Church

Moravians hold a Lovefeast on Good Friday as they receive Holy Communion on Maundy Thursday. 

Communicants of the Moravian Church practice the Good Friday tradition of cleaning gravestones in Moravian cemeteries.

Reformed Churches

In the Reformed tradition, Good Friday is one of the evangelical feasts and is thus widely observed with church services, which feature the Solemn Reproaches in the pattern of Psalm 78, towards the end of the liturgy.

Other Christian traditions

It is not uncommon for some communities to hold interdenominational services on Good Friday.

Associated customs

Good Friday service in Ireland

In many countries with a strong Christian tradition such as Australia, Bermuda, Brazil, Canada, the countries of the Caribbean, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Czech Republic, Ecuador, Finland, Germany, Hungary, Malta, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, the Philippines, the Scandinavian countries, Singapore, Spain, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and Venezuela, the day is observed as a public or federal holiday. In the United States, 12 states observe Good Friday as state holiday: Connecticut, Texas, Delaware, Hawaii, Indiana, Tennessee, Florida, Kentucky, Louisiana, New Jersey, North Carolina and North Dakota. One associated custom is strict adherence to the Black Fast to 3pm or 6pm, where only water can be consumed or restricted handout of bread, herbs and salt. St. Ambrose, St. Chrysostom and St. Basil attest to the practice. The processions of the day, hymns "Crux fidelis" by King John of Portugal, and Eberlin's "Tenebrae factae sunt", followed by "Vexilla Regis" is sung, translated from Latin as the standards of the King advance, and then follows a ceremony that is not a real Mass, it is called the "Mass of the Pre-Sanctified.". This custom is respected also by forgoing the Mass, this is to take heed to the solemnity of the Sacrifice of Calvary. This is where the host of the prior day is placed at the altar, incensed, elevated so "that it may be seen by the people" and consumed. Germany and some other countries have laws prohibiting certain acts, such as dancing and horse racing, that are seen as profaning the solemn nature of the day.

Australia and New Zealand

Good Friday is a holiday under state and territory laws in all states and territories in Australia. Generally speaking, shops in all Australian states (but not in the two territories of the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory) are required to remain closed for the duration of Good Friday, although there are certain shops which are permitted to open and other shops can apply for exemptions. All schools and universities close on Good Friday in Australia, and Good Friday falls within the school holidays in most years in all states and territories except the Northern Territory, although many states now commence their school holidays in early April regardless of Easter. In 2018, for example, when Good Friday fell on 30 March, only Queensland and Victoria had school holidays which coincided with Good Friday. The vast majority of businesses are closed on Good Friday, although many recreational businesses, such as the Sydney Royal Easter Show, open on Good Friday as among non-religious families Good Friday is a popular day to indulge in such activities. In New Zealand, Good Friday is a legal holiday and is a day of mandatory school closure for all New Zealand state and integrated schools. Good Friday is also a restricted trading day in New Zealand, which means that unexempted shops are not permitted to open on this day.

Canada

Vespers of Good Friday afternoon, Greek Orthodox Cathedral in Toronto

In Canada, Good Friday is a federal statutory holiday. In the province of Quebec "employers can choose to give the day off either on Good Friday or Easter Monday."

Cuba

In an online article posted on Catholic News Agency by Alejandro Bermúdez on 31 March 2012, Cuban President Raúl Castro, with the Communist Party and his advisers, decreed that Good Friday that year would be a holiday. This was Castro's response to a request made personally to him by Pope Benedict XVI during the latter's Apostolic Visitation to the island and León, Mexico that month. The move followed the pattern of small advances in Cuba's relations with the Vatican, mirroring Pope John Paul II's success in getting Fidel Castro to declare Christmas Day a holiday. Both Good Friday and Christmas are now annual holidays in Cuba.

Hong Kong

In Hong Kong, despite the transfer of sovereignty from the UK to China in 1997, Good Friday continues to be a public holiday. Government offices, banks, post offices and most offices are closed on Good Friday.

Ireland

In the Republic of Ireland, Good Friday is not an official public holiday, but most non-retail businesses close for the day. Up until 2018 it was illegal to sell alcoholic beverages on Good Friday, with some exceptions, so pubs and off-licences generally closed. Critics of the ban included the catering and tourism sector, but surveys showed that the general public were divided on the issue. In Northern Ireland, a similar ban operates until 5 pm on Good Friday.

Malaysia

Although Malaysia is a Muslim majority country, Good Friday is declared as a public holiday in the states of Sabah and Sarawak in East Malaysia as there is a significant Christian indigenous population in both states.

Malta

Holy Week procession in Malta

The Holy Week commemorations reach their peak on Good Friday as the Roman Catholic Church celebrates the passion of Jesus. Solemn celebrations take place in all churches together with processions in different villages around Malta and Gozo. During the celebration, the narrative of the passion is read in some localities, while the Adoration of the Cross follows. Good Friday processions take place in Birgu, Bormla, Għaxaq, Luqa, Mosta, Naxxar, Paola, Qormi, Rabat, Senglea, Valletta, Żebbuġ (Città Rohan) and Żejtun. Processions in Gozo will be in Nadur, Victoria (St. George and Cathedral), Xagħra and Żebbuġ, Gozo.

Philippines

In the predominantly Roman Catholic Philippines, the day is commemorated with street processions, the Way of the Cross, the chanting of the Pasyón, and performances of the Senákulo or Passion play. Some devotees engage in self-flagellation and even have themselves crucified as expressions of penance despite health risks and strong disapproval from the Church.

Church bells are not rung and Masses are not celebrated, while television features movies, documentaries and other shows focused on the religious event and other topics related to the Catholic faith, broadcasting mostly religious content. Malls and shops are generally closed, as are restaurants as it is the second of three public holidays within the week.

After three o'clock in the afternoon (the time at which Jesus is traditionally believed to have died), the faithful venerate the cross in the local church and follow the procession of the Burial of Jesus.

.

In Cebu and many parts of the Visayan Islands, people usually eat binignit and biko as a form of fasting.

Spain

Nazarenos wearing capirotes, in Málaga, Spain

Main articles: Holy Week in Spain, Holy Week in Málaga, Holy Week in Seville, Holy Week in Valladolid, Holy Week in Viveiro, and Holy Week in Zamora

United Kingdom

Hot cross buns are traditionally toasted and eaten on Good Friday in Britain, Canada and Australia.

In the UK, Good Friday was historically a common law holiday and is recognised as an official public holiday (also known as a Bank Holiday). All state schools are closed and most businesses treat it as a holiday for staff; however, many retail stores now remain open. Government services in Northern Ireland operate as normal on Good Friday, substituting Easter Tuesday for the holiday.

There has traditionally been no horse racing on Good Friday in the UK. However, in 2008, betting shops and stores opened for the first time on this day and in 2014 Lingfield Park and Musselburgh staged the UK's first Good Friday race meetings. The BBC has for many years introduced its 7 am News broadcast on Radio 4 on Good Friday with a verse from Isaac Watts' hymn "When I Survey the Wondrous Cross".

United States

In the United States, Good Friday is not a government holiday at the federal level; however, individual states, counties and municipalities may observe the holiday. Good Friday is a state holiday in Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Hawaii, Indiana, Kentucky (half-day), Louisiana, New Jersey, North Carolina, North Dakota, Tennessee and Texas. State and local government offices and courts are closed, as well as some banks and post offices in these states, and in those counties and municipalities where Good Friday is observed as a holiday. Good Friday is also a holiday in the U.S. territories of Guam, U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico.

The stock markets are closed on Good Friday, but the foreign exchange and bond trading markets open for a partial business day. Most retail stores remain open, while some of them may close early. Public schools and universities are often closed on Good Friday, either as a holiday of its own, or as part of spring break. The postal service operates, and banks regulated by the federal government do not close for Good Friday.

In some governmental contexts Good Friday has been referred to by a generic name such as "spring holiday". In 1999, in the case of Bridenbaugh v. O'Bannon, an Indiana state employee sued the governor for giving state employees Good Friday as a day off. The US Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals ruled against the plaintiff, stating that the government could give state employees a paid day off when that day is a religious holiday, including Good Friday, but only so long as the state can provide a valid secular purpose that coincides with the obvious religious purpose of the holiday.

Calculating the date

See also: Date of Easter

Dates for Good Friday, 2017–2032
YearWesternEastern

2017
 April 14
 April 14

2018
 March 30
 April 6

2019
 April 19
 April 26

2020
 April 10
 April 17

2021
 April 2
 April 30

2022
 April 15
 April 22

2023
 April 7
 April 14

2024
 March 29
 May 3

2025
 April 18
 April 18

2026
 April 3
 April 10

2027
 March 26
 April 30

2028
 April 14
 April 14

2029
 March 30
 April 6

2030
 April 19
 April 26

2031
 April 11
 April 11

2032
 March 26
 April 30

Good Friday is the Friday before Easter, which is calculated differently in Eastern Christianity and Western Christianity (see Computus for details). Easter falls on the first Sunday following the Paschal Full Moon, the full moon on or after 21 March, taken to be the date of the vernal equinox. The Western calculation uses the Gregorian calendar, while the Eastern calculation uses the Julian calendar, whose 21 March now corresponds to the Gregorian calendar's 3 April. The calculations for identifying the date of the full moon also differ. See Computus.

In Eastern Christianity, Easter can fall between 22 March and 25 April on Julian Calendar (thus between 4 April and 8 May in terms of the Gregorian calendar, during the period 1900 and 2099), so Good Friday can fall between 20 March and 23 April, inclusive (or between 2 April and 6 May in terms of the Gregorian calendar).

Good Friday and other named days and day ranges around Lent and Easter in Western Christianity, with the fasting days of Lent numbered

Cultural references

Good Friday assumes a particular importance in the plot of Richard Wagner's music drama Parsifal, which contains an orchestral interlude known as the "Good Friday Music".

Criticism from non-observers

Some Baptist congregations, the Philadelphia Church of God, and some non-denominational churches oppose the observance of Good Friday, regarding it as a papist tradition, and instead observe the Crucifixion of Jesus on Wednesday to coincide with the Jewish sacrifice of the Passover Lamb (which some/many Christians believe is an Old Testament pointer to Jesus Christ). A Wednesday Crucifixion of Jesus allows for him to be in the tomb ("heart of the earth") for three days and three nights as he told the Pharisees he would be (Matthew 12:40), rather than two nights and a day (by inclusive counting, as was the norm at that time) if he had died on a Friday. Preparation Day (14 Nisan on the Hebrew calendar) – which is the day before Passover (15 Nisan), instead of the Friday morning as the Synoptic Gospels refer to the sabbath and they believe this refers to a "high sabbath" which occurs on feast days, and not the ordinary weekly sabbath.

See also

Christianity portal

Holidays portal

Ascension of Jesus

Divine Mercy Sunday

Easter Monday

Easter season

Good Friday Prayer

Good Friday Prayer for the Jews

Good Friday processions in Baliuag

Islamic view of Jesus' death

Life of Jesus in the New Testament

Salvation in Christianity

References

^ Selected Christian Observances, 2020, U.S. Naval Observatory Astronomical Applications Department

^ The Chambers Dictionary. Allied Publishers. p. 639. ISBN 978-81-86062-25-8. Retrieved 13 April 2012.

^ Elizabeth Webber; Mike Feinsilber (1999). Merriam-Webster's Dictionary of Allusions. Merriam-Webster. p. 67. ISBN 978-0-87779-628-2. Retrieved 13 April 2012.

^ Franklin M. Segler; Randall Bradley (1 October 2006). Christian Worship: Its Theology And Practice. B&H Publishing Group. p. 226. ISBN 978-0-8054-4067-6. Retrieved 13 April 2012.

^ Ripley, George; Dana, Charles Anderson (1883). The American Cyclopaedia: A Popular Dictionary for General Knowledge. D. Appleton and Company. p. 101. The Protestant Episcopal, Lutheran, and Reformed churches, as well as many Methodists, observe the day by fasting and special services.

^ a b Pfatteicher, Philip H. (1990). Commentary on the Lutheran Book of Worship: Lutheran Liturgy in Its Ecumenical Context. Augsburg Fortress Publishers. pp. 223–244, 260. ISBN 978-0800603922. The Good Friday fast became the principal fast in the calendar, and even after the Reformation in Germany many Lutherans who observed no other fast scrupulously kept Good Friday with strict fasting.

^ a b Jacobs, Henry Eyster; Haas, John Augustus William (1899). The Lutheran Cyclopedia. Scribner. p. 110. By many Lutherans Good Friday is observed as a strict fast. The lessons on Ash Wednesday emphasize the proper idea of the fast. The Sundays in Lent receive their names from the first words of their Introits in the Latin service, Invocavit, Reminiscere, Oculi, Lcetare, Judica.

^ a b "PHOTOS: Cleaning Moravian gravestones, a Good Friday tradition". Winston-Salem Journal. 10 April 2020. Retrieved 11 April 2020.

^ Harper's New Monthly Magazine, Volume 36, Issue 214. Harper & Brothers. 1868. p. 521. In England Good-Friday and Christmas are the only close holidays of the year when the shops are all closed and the churches opened.

^ a b Petre, Jonathan (21 March 2008). "Good Friday gambling anger churches". The Telegraph. Bookmakers estimate that thousands of shops will be operating, even though Good Friday is one of three days in the year when no horse racing takes place.

^ a b Stevens, Laura (29 March 2013). "In Germany, Some Want to Boogie Every Day of the Year". The Wall Street Journal. Every year on Good Friday, Germany becomes a little like the fictional town in the movie 'Footloose' – dancing is verboten. The decades-old 'Tanzverbot,' or dance ban, applies to all clubs, discos and other forms of organized dancing in all German states.

^ "Good Friday – Definition of Good Friday in the American Heritage Dictionary". Yourdictionary.com. 4 April 2014. Retrieved 23 April 2014.

^ "Home: Oxford English Dictionary". Oed.com. Retrieved 23 April 2014.

^ 

^ Matthew 27:45; Mark 15:13; Luke 23:44

^ Gerald O'Collins, Edward G. Farrugia (2013). A Concise Dictionary of Theology. Paulist Press. p. 108. ISBN 978-1-587-68236-0.

^ There is a wide variety of uses regarding the liturgical colors worn during Great Lent and Holy Week in the Rite of Constantinople.

^ a b Bulgakov, Sergei V. (1900). "Great Friday". Handbook for Church Servers (PDF) (2nd ed.). Kharkov: Tr. Archpriest Eugene D. Tarris. p. 543. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 6 April 2015.

^ Archimandrite Kallistos (Ware) and Mother Mary (2002). "Service of the Twelve Gospels". The Lenten Triodion. South Cannan, PA: St. Tikhon's Seminary Press. p. 587.

^ Today He who hung the earth upon the waters Chanted by the Byzantine Choir of Athens

^ "What happened on Good Friday? The Easter story explained". Metro. 30 March 2018. Retrieved 27 May 2020.

^ "Good Friday | Definition, History, & Facts". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 27 May 2020.

^ "History of Good Friday – Good Friday Story, Eastergoodfriday.com". www.eastergoodfriday.com. Retrieved 27 May 2020.

^ a b "Sacrosanctum concilium". Retrieved 17 April 2017.

^ "Fast & Abstinence". United States Conference of Catholic Bishops. Retrieved 14 April 2017.

^ "Fasting and Abstinence" (PDF). Catholic Bishops' Conference of England and Wales. 24 January 1985. Retrieved 14 April 2017.

^ Roman Missal: Good Friday, 1.

^ Roman Missal: Good Friday, 2.

^ Roman Missal, Good Friday, 3.

^ "Removing Holy Water During Lent. Letter of the Congregation for Divine Worship". 14 March 2003. Archived from the original on 19 April 2014. Retrieved 21 March 2008.

^ "Good Friday – Easter/Lent". Catholic Online. 12 January 2018.

^ Roman Missal: Good Friday, 4.

^ "V. Good Friday". The Catholic Liturgical Library. Archived from the original on 23 January 2013. Retrieved 28 July 2018.

^ Roman Missal: Good Friday, 5.

^ 1962 edition of the Roman Missal.

^ 1920 typical edition of the Roman Missal Archived 1 March 2020 at the Wayback Machine.

^ Caeremoniale Episcoporum, 315.

^ Robert Barron. "Tre Ore - The Three Hours' Agony". Word on Fire. Retrieved 18 April 2019. 'The Three Hours' Agony' or Tre Ore is a liturgical service held on Good Friday from noon until 3 o'clock to commemorate the Passion of Christ. Specifically, it refers to the three hours that Jesus hung on the Cross and includes a series of homilies on the seven last words spoken by Christ.

^ Roman Missal, "Good Friday", Celebration of the Lord's Passion, n. 5.

^ Circular Letter Concerning the Preparation and Celebration of the Easter Feasts, V. Good Friday, 16 January 1988, Sacred Congregation for Divine Worship.

^ Congregation of Divine Worship and Discipline of the Sacraments, Paschale Solemnitatis, III, n. 66 (cf. n. 33)

^ Roman Missal: Good Friday, 7–13.

^ "Compendium of the 1955 Holy Week Revisions". Retrieved 6 April 2020.

^ Roman Missal: Good Friday, 14–21.

^ Roman Missal: Good Friday, 22–31.

^ "Compendium of the 1955 Holy Week Revisions". Retrieved 6 April 2020.

^ Roman Missal: Good Friday, 32–33.

^ "Reparation". Catholic Encyclopedia. Retrieved 17 April 2017.

^ "Raccolta". Catholic Encyclopedia. Retrieved 17 April 2017.

^ Joseph P. Christopher et al., 2003 The Raccolta St Athanasius Press ISBN 978-0-9706526-6-9.

^ Ann Ball, 2003 Encyclopedia of Catholic Devotions and Practices ISBN 0-87973-910-X

^ "Pius XI, Miserentissimus Redemptor (08/05/1928)". vatican.va. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014.

^ "Letter of the Holy Father John Paul II to Cardinal Fiorenzo Angelini for the 50th Anniversary of the Benedictine Sisters of Reparation of the Holy Face". Vatican archives. 27 September 2000. Archived from the original on 2 May 2008.

^ Sanctuary of the Divine Mercy

^ Saint Faustina

^ a b Gassmann, Günther; Oldenburg, Mark W. (2011). Historical Dictionary of Lutheranism. Scarecrow Press. p. 229. ISBN 978-0810874824. In many Lutheran churches, the Sundays during the Lenten season are called by the first word of their respective Latin Introitus (with the exception of Palm/Passion Sunday): Invocavit, Reminiscere, Oculi, Laetare, and Judica. Many Lutheran church orders of the 16th century retained the observation of the Lenten fast, and Lutherans have observed this season with a serene, earnest attitude. Special days of eucharistic communion were set aside on Maundy Thursday and Good Friday.

^ "A Word About Tenebrae |". Historiclectionary.com. 22 March 2010. Retrieved 23 April 2014.

^ Weitzel, Thomas L. (1978). "A Handbook for the Discipline of Lent" (PDF). Evangelical Lutheran Church in America. Retrieved 17 March 2018.

^ Bays, Daniel H; Wacker, Grant (2010). The Foreign Missionary Enterprise at Home: Explorations in North American Cultural History. University of Alabama Press. p. 277. ISBN 978-0817356408.

^ The United Methodist Book of Worship: Regular Edition Black. United Methodist Publishing House. 2016. p. 365. ISBN 978-1426735004.

^ "Christians mark Good Friday". The Daily Reflector. Archived from the original on 30 March 2008. Retrieved 21 March 2007.

^ "Good Friday". Reformed Church in America. Retrieved 8 March 2018.

^ Holidays Act 2003 (New Zealand), Section 17 Days that are public holidays

^ Shop Trading Hours Act Repeal Act 1990 (New Zealand), Section 3 Shops to be closed on Anzac Day morning, Good Friday, Easter Sunday, and Christmas Day

^ Broadcasting Act 1989 (New Zealand), Section 79A Hours during which election programmes prohibited, Section 81 Advertising hours

^ "The Black Fast". Catholic Encyclopedia.

^ "Public holidays – australia.gov.au".

^ "School Term Dates". australia.gov.au. Retrieved 4 February 2018.

^ "Public holidays and anniversary dates". NZ Government. Retrieved 17 March 2018.

^ "PMore information on setting term dates, holidays and closing days". Retrieved 17 March 2018.

^ "Restricted shop trading days » Employment New Zealand". Retrieved 17 March 2018.

^ "Statutory holidays in Canada both national and provincial".

^ "Cuban authorities declare Good Friday 2012 a holiday". Catholic News Agency. Retrieved 23 April 2014.

^ 

^ Gleeson, Colin (2 April 2010). "You can have a pint today – if you know where to look". Irish Independent. Retrieved 3 April 2015.

^ Hade, Emma Jane (2 April 2015). "Good Friday alcohol ban still splits public as only half want it abolished". Irish Independent. Retrieved 3 April 2015.

^ 'Times have changed a lot' – one of Ireland's oldest barmaids (98) pulls pints for the first time on Good Friday independent.ie, 30 March 2018

^ Coulter, Peter (23 March 2016). "Pub owners frustrated at assembly failure to change Easter opening hours". BBC News. Retrieved 25 March 2016.

^ Michael Ipgrave (2008). Building a Better Bridge: Muslims, Christians, and the Common Good : a Record of the Fourth Building Bridges Seminar Held in Sarajevo, Bosnia-Herzegovina, May 15–18, 2005. Georgetown University Press. pp. 109–. ISBN 1-58901-731-5.

^ Marks, Kathy (22 March 2008). "Dozens ignore warnings to re-enact crucifixion". The Independent. London. Retrieved 23 March 2008.

^ Nwaubani, Adaobi Tricia (23 May 2013). "Igbo burials: How Nigeria will bid farewell to Achebe". BBC News. Retrieved 31 January 2020.

^ Izobelle T. Pulgo, "Binignit: A Good Friday Cebuano soul food", Cebu Daily News, 23 March 2016.

^ Deralyn Ramos, "Holy Week in the Philippines", Tsuneishi Balita, March 2013, p. 4.

^ Rohrer, Finlo (1 April 2010). "How did hot cross buns become two a penny?". BBC News magazine. Retrieved 6 April 2012.

^ "Bank holidays and British Summer Time". Directgov. Retrieved 19 April 2011.

^ Petre, Jonathan (21 March 2008). "Good Friday gambling angers churches". The Telegraph. Retrieved 6 April 2012.

^ "Lingfield: £1m Good Friday fixture to be held at Surrey racecourse". BBC News. 9 October 2013. Retrieved 14 October 2013.

^ Brown, Craig (11 October 2013). "Musselburgh to host historic Good Friday racing". The Scotsman. Retrieved 14 October 2013.

^ Government of Connecticut. "Legal State Holidays". CT.gov. Retrieved 30 March 2018.

^ "Delaware – Office of Management and Budget – State of Delaware Holidays". Delawarepersonnel.com. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012. Retrieved 23 April 2014.

^ "Title XXXIX Commercial Relations Section 683.01 Legal holidays". onecle.com. Archived from the original on 2 February 2014.

^ "Hawaii State Holidays for 2014". Miraclesalad.com. Retrieved 23 April 2014.

^ "Secretary of State: 2011 Indiana State Holidays". In.gov. Retrieved 23 April 2014.

^ "Holidays". Personnel.ky.gov. Retrieved 23 April 2014.

^ Sandra G. Gillen, CPPB. "2014 State Holidays Calendar Observed by OSP". Doa.louisiana.gov. Archived from the original on 1 February 2014. Retrieved 23 April 2014.

^ "The Official Web Site for The State of New Jersey | State Holidays". Nj.gov. Retrieved 23 April 2014.

^ "N.C. State Government Holiday Schedule for 2013 and 2014". Ic.nc.gov. Retrieved 23 April 2014.

^ "North Dakota State Holidays 2014". The Holiday Schedule. Retrieved 23 April 2014.

^ "Official State Holidays". TN.gov. Archived from the original on 29 May 2013. Retrieved 23 April 2014.

^ In addition to holidays where offices are closed, Texas also has "partial staffing holidays" (where offices are required to be open for public business, but where employees may take it off as a holiday) and "optional holidays" (where an employee may take off in lieu of taking off on a partial staffing holiday; Good Friday is an optional holiday).

^ "Texas State Holidays". The State of Texas. Retrieved 19 January 2018.

^ "Guam Public Holidays 2012 (Oceania)". Qppstudio.net. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 23 April 2014.

^ "US Virgin Islands Public Holidays 2012 (Americas/Caribbean)". Qppstudio.net. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 23 April 2014.

^ "Puerto Rican Holidays". Topuertorico.org. Retrieved 23 April 2014.

^ "NYSE: Holidays and Trading Hours". nyse.com.

^ "Stock Market Holidays". Money-zine.com. Retrieved 23 April 2014.

^ "CME Group Chicago Trading Floor Holiday Schedule for 2015" (PDF). CME Group.

^ "Holiday Schedule". sifma.org.

^ "Federal Holidays". Opm.gov. Retrieved 23 April 2014.

^  Archived 14 April 2014 at the Wayback Machine

^ Goldman, Russell (29 March 2010). "Iowa Town Renames Good Friday to 'Spring Holiday'". ABC News. Retrieved 23 April 2014.

^ Villarreal, Abe (17 April 2014). "Spring Holiday – Western New Mexico University". Wnmu.edu. Retrieved 23 April 2014.

^ "Good Friday in the United States".

^ "Good Friday Music – Dictionary definition of Good Friday Music". Encyclopedia.com: FREE online dictionary. Retrieved 17 April 2017.

^ Landis, L. K. (8 June 1998). "Proof for a Wednesday Crucifixion". King James Bible Baptist Church, Ladson, South Carolina. Retrieved 23 April 2014.

^ "The Resurrection Was Not on Sunday". thetrumpet.com. Archived from the original on 18 April 2009.

^ "The Cradle & the Cross (original)". thebereancall.org. 1 December 1992. Retrieved 23 April 2014.

^ "Cult, Cults, Abuse by Religions, Abuse Recovery Discussion & Resources, Peer-Support, Legal support". factnet.org. Archived from the original on 16 April 2009.

Further reading

"Mayor wants 'draconian' Good Friday booze ban lifted before 1916 centenary – Independent.ie". Independent.ie. Retrieved 25 March 2016.

External links

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Good Friday.

 Wikiquote has quotations related to: Good Friday

The Eastern Orthodox commemoration of Holy Friday

Great Friday instructions from S. V. Bulgakov's Handbook for Church Servers (Russian Orthodox Church)

"Good Friday" article from The Catholic Encyclopedia

Episcopal Good Friday Service

https://www.bbc.com/news/blogs-magazine-monitor-27067136

https://www.timeanddate.com/holidays/common/good-friday

Links to related articles

v

t

e

Holy Week and Easter

Controversies

Date (List)

Etymology

Observances

Traditions

Days 
Palm Sunday

Holy Monday

Holy Tuesday

Holy Wednesday

Maundy Thursday

Good Friday

Holy Saturday

Easter

Easter Monday

Easter Friday

Easter Saturday

Events 
Shrovetide

Lent
Great Lent

Paschal Triduum

Easter Week

Bright Week

Octave of Easter

Eastertide

Divine Mercy Sunday

Mid-Pentecost

Pentecost

Trinity Sunday

Christianity 
Passion of Jesus

Last Supper

Crucifixion of Jesus

Burial of Jesus

Resurrection of Jesus

Dormition of the Theotokos

Tenebrae

Easter Vigil

Epitaphios

Exsultet

Good Friday Prayer
For Jews

Jesus

Lumen Christi

Myrrhbearers

Paschal candle

Paschal cycle

Paschal greeting

Paschal Homily

Paschal trikirion

Paschal troparion

Pentecostarion

Traditions 
Artos

Burning of Judas

Cascarón

Clipping the church

Croatian pisanica

Crucession

Easter basket

Easter Bilby

Easter bonnet

Easter Bunny

Easter egg

Easter egg tree

Easter parade

Easter postcard

Easter Sepulchre

Egg dance

Egg decorating

Egg decorating in Slavic culture

Egg hunt

Egg rolling

Egg tapping

Egg tossing

Fasika

Gorzkie żale

Holy Fire

Holy Week procession

Lieldienas

Osterbrunnen

Pace Egg play

Polish pisanka

Pysanka

Radonitsa

Rouketopolemos

Saitopolemos

Scoppio del carro

Sunrise service

Święconka

Traditional Easter games and customs

Media 
Bleib bei uns, denn es will Abend werden, BWV 6

Christ lag in Todes Banden, BWV 4

Easter hymns

Easter Oratorio

Erfreut euch, ihr Herzen, BWV 66

Der Friede sei mit dir, BWV 158

Ein Herz, das seinen Jesum lebend weiß, BWV 134

Films

Der Himmel lacht! Die Erde jubilieret, BWV 31

I Will Mention the Loving-kindnesses

Ich lebe, mein Herze, zu deinem Ergötzen, BWV 145

Passion hymns

Russian Easter Festival Overture

Topics 
Computus

Dionysius Exiguus' Easter table

Easter controversy

Easter Epic

Ecclesiastical new moon

Paschal Full Moon

Pussy willow

Reform of the date of Easter

Society 
Ēostre

Maslenitsa

Salzburg Easter Festival

v

t

e

Liturgical year of the Catholic Church

Ordinary Form of the Roman Rite of the Latin Church (1969 Calendar)

Advent 
Immaculate Conception

Gaudete Sunday

December 17 to 23

Christmas Season 
Christmas

Holy Family

Mary, Mother of God

Epiphany

Baptism of the Lord

Ordinary Time I 
Presentation of the Lord

Lent 
Ash Wednesday

Saint Joseph

Annunciation

Laetare Sunday

Palm Sunday

Holy Week

Paschal Triduum 
Holy Thursday
Chrism Mass

Mass of the Lord's Supper

Good Friday

Holy Saturday

Easter Vigil

Easter Season 
Easter Sunday
Octave

Divine Mercy Sunday

Ascension

Pentecost

Ordinary Time II 
Trinity Sunday

Corpus Christi

Sacred Heart

Visitation

Saint John the Baptist

Saints Peter and Paul

Transfiguration

Assumption

Nativity of Mary

Exaltation of the Cross

All Saints' Day

All Souls' Day

Presentation of Mary

Christ the King

Extraordinary Form of the Roman Rite of the Latin Church (1960 Calendar)

Advent 
Rorate Mass

Immaculate Conception

Gaudete Sunday

Greater Ferias

Winter Ember Days

Christmas Season 
Christmas

Octave Day of Christmas

Holy Name of Jesus

Epiphany Season 
Epiphany

Holy Family

Baptism of the Lord

Purification of MaryP

Lent

Pre-Lent 
Septuagesima

Sexagesima

Quinquagesima

Lent 
Ash Wednesday

Spring Ember Days

Saint Joseph

Annunciation

Laetare Sunday

Passiontide 
Passion Sunday

Palm SundayP

Holy WeekP

Paschal Triduum 
Tenebrae

Holy Thursday
Chrism Mass

Mass of the Lord's Supper

Good Friday

Holy Saturday

Easter Vigil

Easter Season 
Easter SundayP
Octave

Rogation DaysP

AscensionP

Pentecost Season 
Pentecost

Summer Ember Days

Trinity Sunday

Corpus ChristiP

Sacred Heart

Saint John the Baptist

Saints Peter and Paul

Precious Blood

Visitation

Transfiguration

Assumption

Nativity of Mary

Exaltation of the CrossP

Autumn Ember Days

Maternity of Mary

Christ the King

All Saints' Day

All Souls' Day

Presentation of Mary

Legend

P = Ordinary Procession according to the Roman Ritual

Legend

Italic font marks the 10 holy days of obligation in the universal calendar which do not normally fall on a Sunday.

Older calendars
1955

pre-1955

Tridentine

Liturgical colours

Ranking

Computus

 Catholicism portal

v

t

e

Public holidays in Australia

New Year's Day

Australia Day

Good Friday

Easter Saturday

Easter Monday

Anzac Day

Queen's Birthday

Labour Day

Christmas Day

Boxing Day

v

t

e

Holidays in Canada

Nationwide statutory holidays 
New Year's Day

Good Friday

Canada Day

Labour Day

Christmas Day

Statutory holidays for

federal employees 
Easter Monday

Victoria Day

Thanksgiving

Remembrance Day

Boxing Day

Indigenous holidays 
Hobiyee

National Aboriginal Day

Other common holidays 
August Civic Holiday

Family Day/Heritage Day/Islander Day/Louis Riel Day

Memorial Day (Newfoundland and Labrador)

Quebec National Holiday

v

t

e

Public holidays in Hong Kong

New Year's Day

Lunar New Year (first 3 days of the period)

Ching Ming Festival

Good Friday

Holy Saturday

Easter Monday

Buddha's Birthday

Labour Day

Tuen Ng Festival

Hong Kong SAR Establishment Day

Mid-Autumn Festival

PRC National Day

Chung Yeung Festival

Christmas Day

Boxing Day

Cancelled 
Queen's Birthday

Liberation Day

Double Ten Day

Remembrance Day

v

t

e

Public holidays in Indonesia

New Year's Day

Chinese New Year

Day of Silence

Isra and Mi'raj

Good Friday

Labour Day

Waisak Day

Ascension Day

Pancasila Day

Collective Days

Eid al-Fitr

Eid al-Adha

Independence Day

Muharram

Maulidur Rasul

Christmas

v

t

e

Public holidays in Malaysia

National holidays 
Chinese New Year

Labour Day

Wesak Day

Eid al-Fitr

Eid al-Adha

Merdeka Day

Muharram

Agong's Birthday

Malaysia Day

Muhammad's Birthday

Christmas

State holidays

(differ by states) 
New Year's Day

Yang di-Pertua Negeri Sembilan's Birthday

Sultan of Kedah's Birthday

Thaipusam

Federal Territory Day

Anniversary of Installation of the Sultan of Terengganu

Sultan of Johor's Birthday

Isra and Mi'raj

Declaration of Malacca City as Historical City

Good Friday

Sultan of Terengganu's Birthday

First Day of Ramadan

Day of Nuzul Al-Quran

Tadau Kaamatan

Gawai Dayak

Declaration of George Town as World Heritage Site

Penang State Governor's Birthday

Raja of Perlis's Birthday

Sarawak Independence Day

Hol Day of Sultan Iskandar of Johor

Sabah State Governor's Birthday

Melaka State Governor's Birthday

Sarawak State Governor's Birthday

Sultan of Pahang's Birthday

Deepavali

Sultan of Perak's Birthday

Sultan of Kelantan's Birthday

Sultan of Selangor's Birthday

v

t

e

Public holidays in New Zealand

New Year's Day

January 2

Waitangi Day

Good Friday

Easter Sunday

Easter Monday

Anzac Day

Queen's Birthday

Labour Day

Christmas Day

Boxing Day

v

t

e

Public holidays in the Philippines

Regular holidays 
New Year's Day

Maundy Thursday

Good Friday

Araw ng Kagitingan

Labor Day

Independence Day:

Eid'l Fitr

National Heroes' Day

Eid'l Adha

Bonifacio Day

Christmas

Rizal Day

Special non-working days 
Chinese New Year

Black Saturday

Ninoy Aquino Day

All Saints' Day and All Souls' Day

Immaculate Conception

Christmas Eve

Last day of the year

Special holiday (for schools) 
EDSA Revolution Anniversary

Italicized: Movable holiday

v

t

e

Public holidays in South Africa

New Year's Day

Human Rights Day

Good Friday

Family Day

Freedom Day

Workers' Day

Youth Day

National Women's Day

Heritage Day

Day of Reconciliation

Christmas Day

Day of Goodwill

v

t

e

Public holidays in Sri Lanka

Jan–Mar 
Thai Pongal

Duruthu Poya Day

Independence Day

Navam Poya Day

Maha Shivratri

Madin Poya Day

Apr–Jun 
Sinhala and Tamil New Year Day eve

Sinhalese New Year/Tamil New Year

Bak Poya Day

Good Friday

May Day

Vesak Poya Day

Day following Vesak Poya Day

Id-Ul-Fitr (Ramazan Festival Day)

Poson Poya Day

Jul–Sep 
Esala Poya Day

Id-Ul-Alha (Hadji Festival Day)

Nikini Poya Day

Binara Poya Day

Oct–Dec 
Vap Poya Day

Deepavali Festival Day

Milad-Un-Nabi (Holy Prophet’s Birthday)

Ill Poya Day

Unduvap Poya Day

Christmas Day

v

t

e

Public holidays in the United Kingdom

All regions 
New Year's Day

May Bank Holiday

Summer Bank Holiday

Christmas Day

Boxing Day

England and Wales 
Good Friday

Easter Monday

Spring Bank Holiday

Northern Ireland 
Saint Patrick's Day

Easter Monday

Easter Tuesday

Spring Bank Holiday

Battle of the Boyne (Orangemen's Day)

Scotland 
2nd January

Good Friday

St Andrew's Day (optional)

v

t

e

Holidays, observances, and celebrations in the United States

January 
New Year's Day (federal)

Martin Luther King Jr. Day (federal)

Birthday of Eugenio María de Hostos (PR)

Confederate Heroes Day (TX)

Eve of Three Kings' Day (PR, religious)

Feast of Epiphany / Feast of Theophany (NJ, religious)

Fred Korematsu Day (CA, FL, HI, VA)

Idaho Human Rights Day (ID)

Inauguration Day (federal quadrennial)

Kansas Day (KS)

Makar Sankranti / Pongal (NJ, religious)

Robert E. Lee Day (FL)

Stephen Foster Memorial Day (36)

The Eighth (LA)

Three Kings' Day (PR, VI, religious)

World Religion Day (NJ, religious)

January–February 
Super Bowl Sunday

Chinese New Year / Lunar New Year (NJ, NY, cultural, religious)

Vasant Panchami (NJ, religious)

February

American Heart Month

Black History Month 
Washington's Birthday / Presidents' Day (federal)

Valentine's Day

Birthday of Luis Muñoz Marín (PR)

Candlemas (NJ, religious)

Charles Darwin Day / Darwin Day (CA, DE)

Day of Remembrance (CA, OR, WA, cultural)

Georgia Day (GA)

Groundhog Day

Imbolc (NJ, religious)

Lincoln's Birthday (CA, CT, IL, IN, MO, NJ, NY, WV)

National Girls and Women in Sports Day

National Freedom Day (36)

Nirvana Day (NJ, religious)

Presentation of Our Lord to the Temple (NJ, religious)

Promised Reformer Day (religious)

Ronald Reagan Day (CA)

Rosa Parks Day (CA, MO)

Saviours' Day (religious)

Susan B. Anthony Day (CA, FL, NY, WI, WV, proposed federal)

Tu B’shvat (NJ, religious)

February–March 
 Mardi Gras

Ash Wednesday (NJ, PR, religious)

Carnival (PR, VI, religious)

Clean Monday (NJ, religious)

Courir de Mardi Gras (religious)

Intercalary Days (NJ, religious)

Mahashivaratri (NJ, religious)

Purim (NJ, religious)

Shrove Tuesday (NJ, religious)

Super Tuesday

March

Irish-American Heritage Month

National Colon Cancer Awareness Month

Women's History Month 
Saint Patrick's Day (religious)

Spring break (week)

Annunciation of the Virgin Mary / Annunciation of the Theotokos (NJ, religious)

Casimir Pulaski Day (IL)

Cesar Chavez Day (CA, CO, TX, proposed federal)

Emancipation Day in Puerto Rico (PR, cultural)

Evacuation Day (Suffolk County, MA)

Harriet Tubman Day (NY)

Hola Mohalla (NJ, religious)

Holi (NY, NJ, religious)

L. Ron Hubbard’s Birthday (NJ, religious)

Lailat al-Mi'raj (NJ, religious)

Liberation and Freedom Day (Charlottesville, VA, cultural)

Mardi Gras (AL (in two counties), LA)

Maryland Day (MD)

National Poison Prevention Week (week)

Nowruz (NJ, cultural, religious)

Ostara (NJ, religious)

Prince Jonah Kūhiō Kalanianaʻole Day (HI)

Promised Messiah Day (religious)

Saint Joseph's Day (religious)

Seward's Day (AK)

Texas Independence Day (TX)

Town Meeting Day (VT)

Transfer Day (VI)

March–April 
Easter (religious)

Good Friday (CT, NC, PR, NJ, VI, religious)

Hanuman Jayanti (NJ, religious)

Holy Thursday (NJ, PR, VI, religious)

Holy Week (PR, religious, week)

Lazarus Saturday (NJ, religious)

Mahavir Janma Kalyanak (NJ, religious)

Mesha Sankranti / Hindu New Year (religious)

Palm Sunday (NJ, PR, religious)

Passover (NJ, religious)

Easter Monday / Bright Monday (NJ, VI religious)

Ramnavami (NJ, religious)

Chandramana Yugadi / Souramana Yugadi (NJ, religious)

April

Confederate History Month 
420

April Fools' Day

Arbor Day

Birthday of José de Diego (PR)

Confederate Memorial Day (AL, MS)

Days of Remembrance of the Victims of the Holocaust (week)

Earth Day

Emancipation Day (cultural)

Thomas Jefferson's Birthday (AL)

Lag B’Omer (NJ, religious)

Last Friday of Great Lent (NJ, religious)

Laylat al-Qadr (NJ, religious)

Pascua Florida (FL)

Patriots' Day (MA, ME)

Ridván (NJ, religious)

San Jacinto Day (TX)

Siblings Day

Walpurgis Night (religious)

Yom Ha'atzmaut (NJ, cultural, religious)

May

Asian Pacific American Heritage Month

Jewish American Heritage Month 
Memorial Day (federal)

Mother's Day (36)

Cinco de Mayo

Ascension of Baháʼu'lláh (NJ, religious)

Ascension of Our Lord (NJ, religious)

Caliphate Day (religious)

Declaration of the Bab (NJ, religious)

Harvey Milk Day (CA)

International Workers' Day / May Day (CA, unofficial, proposed state)

Law Day (36)

Loyalty Day (36)

Malcolm X Day (CA, IL, proposed federal)

Military Spouse Day

National Day of Prayer (36)

National Day of Reason

National Defense Transportation Day (36)

National Maritime Day (36)

Milad Syedna Mufaddal Saifuddin (NJ, religious)

Peace Officers Memorial Day (36)

Pentecost (NJ, religious)

Shavuot (NJ, religious)

Truman Day (MO)

Vesak / Buddha's Birthday (NJ, religious)

June

Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and

Transgender Pride Month 
Father's Day (36)

Bunker Hill Day (Suffolk County, MA)

Carolina Day (SC)

Emancipation Day In Texas / Juneteenth (TX, cultural)

Fast of the Holy Apostles (NJ, religious)

Flag Day (36, proposed federal)

Helen Keller Day (PA)

Honor America Days (3 weeks)

Jefferson Davis Day (AL, FL)

Kamehameha Day (HI)

Litha (NJ, religious)

Martyrdom of Guru Arjan Dev Sahib (NJ, religious)

Odunde Festival (Philadelphia, PA, cultural)

Senior Week (week)

Saint John's Day (PR, religious)

West Virginia Day (WV)

July 
Independence Day (federal)

Asalha Puja Day (NJ, religious)

Birthday of Don Luis Muñoz Rivera (PR)

Birthday of Dr. José Celso Barbosa (PR)

Emancipation Day in the U.S. Virgin Islands (VI, cultural)

Guru Purnima (NJ, religious)

Khordad Sal (NJ, religious)

Lā Hoʻihoʻi Ea (HI, unofficial, cultural)

Martyrdom of the Báb (NJ, religious)

Parents' Day (36)

Pioneer Day (UT)

Puerto Rico Constitution Day (PR)

July–August 
Summer vacation

Hajj (NJ, religious)

Tisha B'Av (NJ, religious)

Yawm al-Arafa (NJ, religious)

August 
American Family Day (AZ)

Barack Obama Day in Illinois (IL)

Bennington Battle Day (VT)

Dormition of the Theotokos (NJ, religious)

Eid-e-Ghadeer (NJ, religious)

Fast in Honor of the Holy Mother of Lord Jesus (NJ, religious)

Feast of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary (NJ, religious)

Hawaii Admission Day / Statehood Day (HI)

Krishna Janmashtami (NJ, religious)

Lammas (NJ, religious)

Lyndon Baines Johnson Day (TX)

Naga Panchami (NJ, religious)

National Aviation Day (36)

Paryushana (NJ, religious)

Raksha Bandhan (NJ, religious)

Transfiguration of the Lord (NJ, religious)

Victory Day (RI)

Women's Equality Day (36)

September

Prostate Cancer Awareness Month

National Childhood Cancer Awareness Month 
Labor Day (federal)

Brazilian Day (NY, cultural)

California Admission Day (CA)

Carl Garner Federal Lands Cleanup Day (36)

Constitution Day (36)

Constitution Week (week)

Defenders Day (MD)

Elevation of the Holy Cross (NJ, religious)

Feast of San Gennaro (NY, cultural, religious)

Ganesh Chaturthi (NJ, religious)

Gold Star Mother's Day (36)

His Holiness Sakya Trizin’s Birthday (NJ, religious)

Mabon (NJ, religious)

National Grandparents Day (36)

National Payroll Week (week)

Nativity of Mary / Nativity of the Theotokos (NJ, religious)

Native American Day (proposed federal)

Patriot Day (36)

September–October

Hispanic Heritage Month 
Chehlum Imam Hussain (NJ, religious)

Oktoberfest

Pitri Paksha (religious)

Rosh Hashanah / Feast of Trumpets (TX, NJ, NY, religious)

Shemini Atzeret (NJ, religious)

Simchat Torah (NJ, religious)

Vijaya Dashami (religious)

Yom Kippur / Day of Atonement (TX, NJ, NY, religious)

October

Breast Cancer Awareness Month

Disability Employment Awareness Month

Italian-American Heritage and Culture Month

Filipino American History Month

LGBT History Month 
Columbus Day (federal)

Halloween

Alaska Day (AK)

Child Health Day (36)

General Pulaski Memorial Day

German-American Day

Indigenous Peoples' Day (VT)

International Day of Non-Violence

Leif Erikson Day (36)

Missouri Day (MO)

Nanomonestotse (cultural)

National School Lunch Week (week)

Native American Day in South Dakota (SD)

Nevada Day (NV)

Spirit Day (cultural)

Sweetest Day

Sukkot / Feast of Tabernacles (NJ, religious)

Virgin Islands–Puerto Rico Friendship Day (PR, VI)

White Cane Safety Day (36)

October–November 
Birth of the Báb (NJ, religious)

Birth of Baháʼu'lláh (NJ, religious)

Day of the Dead (VI)

Diwali (NJ, NY, religious)

Mawlid al-Nabi (NJ, religious)

November

Native American Indian Heritage Month 
Veterans Day (federal)

Thanksgiving (federal)

Ascension of ‘Abdu’l Baha (NJ, religious)

All Saints' Day (NJ, religious)

Beginning of the Nativity Fast (NJ, religious)

Beltane / Samhain (NJ, religious)

Barack Obama Day in Alabama (Perry County, AL)

D. Hamilton Jackson Day (VI)

Day after Thanksgiving (24)

Day of the Covenant (NJ, religious)

Discovery of Puerto Rico Day (PR)

Election Day (CA, DE, HI, KY, MT, NJ, NY, OH, PR, VA, WV, proposed federal)

Family Day (NV)

Guru Nanak Gurpurab (NJ, religious)

Hanukkah (NJ, religious)

Lā Kūʻokoʻa (HI, unofficial, cultural)

Martyrdom of Guru Tegh Bahadur (NJ, religious)

Native American Heritage Day (MD, WA, cultural)

Presentation of the Theotokos to the Temple (NJ, religious)

Unthanksgiving Day (cultural)

Urus Mubarak of Syedna Mohammed Burhanuddin (NJ, religious)

December 
Christmas (religious, federal)

New Year's Eve

Advent Sunday (NJ, religious)

Alabama Day (AL)

Birthday of Guru Gobind Singh Sahib (NJ, religious)

Bodhi Day (NJ, religious)

Chalica (religious)

Christmas Eve (KY, NC, SC, PR, VI)

Day after Christmas (KY, NC, SC, TX, VI)

Festivus

HumanLight

Hanukkah (religious, week)

Immaculate Conception (NJ, religious)

Indiana Day (IN)

Kwanzaa (cultural, week)

Milad Syedna Mohammed Burhanuddin (NJ, religious)

National Pearl Harbor Remembrance Day (36)

Nativity of Jesus (NJ, religious)

Old Year's Night (VI)

Pan American Aviation Day (36)

Pancha Ganapati (religious, week)

Rosa Parks Day (OH, OR)

Solemnity of Mary, Mother of God (NJ, religious)

Wright Brothers Day (36)

Yule (NJ, religious)

Zartosht No-Diso (NJ, religious)

Varies (year round) 
Eid al-Adha (NJ, NY, religious)

Eid al-Fitr (NJ, NY, religious)

Islamic New Year (NJ, religious)

Navaratri (NJ, religious, four times a year)

Obon (NJ, religious)

Onam (NJ, religious)

Ramadan (religious, month)

Ghost Festival (NJ, religious)

Yawm Aashura (NJ, religious)

Legend: 
(federal) = federal holidays, (abbreviation) = state/territorial holidays, (religious) = religious holidays, (cultural) = holiday related to a specific racial/ethnic group or sexual minority, (week) = week-long holidays, (month) = month-long holidays, (36) = Title 36 Observances and Ceremonies

Bold indicates major holidays commonly celebrated in the United States, which often represent the major celebrations of the month.

See also: Lists of holidays, Hallmark holidays, public holidays in the United States, New Jersey, New York, Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands.

Authority control 
GND: 4163328-3
