"Grand Canal of China

Watercraft moving across the Grand Canal of China in Suzhou, 2005

Courses of the Grand Canal

Specifications

Length 1,794 km (1,115 miles)

History

Construction began Sui dynasty

Geography

Start point Tianjin

End point Hangzhou

Connects to Hai River, Yellow River, Huai River, Yangtze River, Qiantang River

UNESCO World Heritage Site

Official name The Grand Canal

Type Cultural

Criteria i, iii, iv, vi

Designated 2014 (38th session)

Reference no. 1443

State Party China

Region Asia-Pacific

Grand Canal

"Grand Canal" in Simplified (top) and Traditional (bottom) Chinese characters

Simplified Chinese 大运河

Traditional Chinese 大運河

Literal meaning "Great Transport River"

Transcriptions

Standard Mandarin

Hanyu Pinyin Dà Yùnhé

Wade–Giles Ta4 Yün4-he2

IPA 

Wu

Romanization Du平 Yun上 Ghu平

Yue: Cantonese

Jyutping Daai6 Wan6 Ho4

Southern Min

Hokkien POJ Tāi-ūn-hô

Beijing-Hangzhou Grand Canal

Simplified Chinese 京杭大运河

Traditional Chinese 京杭大運河

Transcriptions

Standard Mandarin

Hanyu Pinyin Jīng-Háng Dà Yùnhé

Wade–Giles Ching1-Hang2 Ta4 Yün4-he2

IPA 

Wu

Romanization Cin平 On入 Du平 Yun上 Ghu平

Yue: Cantonese

Jyutping Ging1 Hong4 Daai6 Wan6 Ho4

Southern Min

Hokkien POJ Kiaⁿ-hâng-tāi-ūn-hô

The Grand Canal, known to the Chinese as the Jing–Hang Grand Canal (Chinese: 京杭大運河; pinyin: Jīng-Háng Dà Yùnhé; lit.: 'Capital–Hangzhou Grand Canal', or more commonly, as the「大運河」("Grand Canal")), a UNESCO World Heritage Site, is the longest canal or artificial river in the world. Starting at Beijing, it passes through Tianjin and the provinces of Hebei, Shandong, Jiangsu and Zhejiang to the city of Hangzhou, linking the Yellow River and Yangtze River. The oldest parts of the canal date back to the 5th century BCE, but the various sections were first connected during the Sui dynasty (581–618 CE). Dynasties in 1271–1633 significantly rebuilt the canal and altered its route to supply their capital Beijing.

The total length of the Grand Canal is 1,776 km (1,104 mi). Its greatest height is reached in the mountains of Shandong, at a summit of 42 m (138 ft). Ships in Chinese canals did not have trouble reaching higher elevations after the pound lock was invented in the 10th century, during the Song dynasty (960–1279), by the government official and engineer Qiao Weiyue. The canal has been admired by many throughout history including Japanese monk Ennin (794–864), Persian historian Rashid al-Din (1247–1318), Korean official Choe Bu (1454–1504), and Italian missionary Matteo Ricci (1552–1610).

Historically, periodic flooding of the Yellow River threatened the safety and functioning of the canal. During wartime, the high dikes of the Yellow River were sometimes deliberately broken in order to flood and thus sweep away advancing enemy troops. This would cause disaster and prolonged economic hardships for local residents. Despite temporary periods of desolation and disuse, the Grand Canal furthered an indigenous and growing economic market in China's urban centers from the Sui period onwards to the present. It has allowed faster trading and has thus improved China's economy. The southern portion remains in heavy use to the present day.

Contents

1 History

1.1 Precursors

1.2 Sui dynasty

1.3 Tang to Yuan dynasties

1.4 Ming dynasty restoration

1.5 Qing dynasty and modern China

1.6 Historical sections

1.6.1 Jia Canal

1.6.2 Nanyang New Canal

1.6.3 Huitong Canal

1.6.4 Jizhou Canal

1.6.5 Duke Huan's Conduit

1.6.6 Yilou Canal

2 Modern course

2.1 Jiangnan Canal

2.2 Inner Canal

2.3 Middle Canal

2.4 Lu Canal

2.5 Southern Canal

2.6 Northern Canal and Tonghui River

2.7 Eastern Zhejiang Canal

3 Elevations

4 Uses

4.1 Transportation

4.2 South-North Water Transfer Project

5 Notable travelers

6 See also

7 References

7.1 Citations

7.2 Sources

8 External links

History

Precursors

In the late Spring and Autumn period (770–476 BCE), Fuchai, King of the State of Wu (whose capital was in present-day Suzhou), ventured north to attack the State of Qi. He ordered a canal to be constructed for trading purposes, as well as a means to ship ample supplies north in case his forces should engage the northern states of Song and Lu. This canal became known as the Han Gou (邗溝, "Han Conduit"). Work began in 486 BCE, from south of Yangzhou to north of Huai'an in Jiangsu, and within three years the Han Gou had connected the Yangtze with the Huai River by means of existing waterways, lakes, and marshes.

The Han Gou is known as the second oldest section of the later Grand Canal since the Hong Gou (t 鴻溝, s 鸿沟, Hónggōu, "Canal of the Wild Geese" or "Far-Flung Canal") most likely preceded it. It linked the Yellow River near Kaifeng to the Si and Bian rivers and became the model for the shape of the Grand Canal in the north. The exact date of the Hong Gou's construction is uncertain; it is first mentioned by the diplomat Su Qin in 330 BCE when discussing state boundaries. The historian Sima Qian (145–90 BCE) knew of no historical date for it, placing his discussion of it just after the legendary works of Yu the Great; modern scholars now consider it to belong to the 6th century BCE.

Sui dynasty

The Grand Canal, under Sui and Tang dynasties.

Emperor Wen of Sui, who launched the project of the Grand Canal (left), alongside his son Emperor Yang of Sui, who completed the first stage of the project (right). Both paintings by Yan Liben.

The sections of the Grand Canal today in Zhejiang and southern Jiangsu provinces were in large part a creation of the Sui dynasty (581–618), a result of the migration of China's core economic and agricultural region away from the Yellow River valley in the north and toward the southern provinces. Its main role throughout its history was the transport of grain to the capital. The institution of the Grand Canal by the Qin dynasty and the Sui dynasty, mostly the Sui, also obviated the need for the army to become self-sufficient farmers while posted at the northern frontier, as food supplies could now easily be shipped from south to north over the pass.

By the year 600, there were major buildups of silt on the bottom of the Honggou canal, obstructing river barges whose drafts were too deep for its waters. The chief engineer of the Sui dynasty, Yuwen Kai, advised the dredging of a new canal that would run parallel to the existing canal, diverging from it at Chenliu (Yanzhou). The new canal was to pass not Xuzhou but Suzhou, to avoid connecting with the Si River, and instead make a direct connection with the Huai River just west of Lake Hongze. With the recorded labor of five million men and women under the supervision of Ma Shumou, the first major section of the Grand Canal was completed in the year 605—called the Bian Qu. The Grand Canal was fully completed under the second Sui emperor, from the years 604 to 609, first by linking Luoyang to the Yangzhou (and the Yangtze valley), then expanding it to Hangzhou (south), and to Beijing (north). This allowed the southern area to provide grain to the northern province, particularly to troops stationed there. Running alongside and parallel to the canal was an imperial roadway and post offices supporting a courier system. The government also planted an enormous line of trees. The history of the canal's construction is handed down in the book Kaiheji ('Record of the Opening of the Canal').

The earlier dyke-building project in 587 along the Yellow River—overseen by engineer Liang Rui—established canal lock gates to regulate water levels for the canal. Double slipways were installed to haul boats over when the difference in water levels were too great for the flash lock to operate.

Between 604 and 609, Emperor Yang Guang (or Sui Yangdi) of the Sui dynasty ordered a number of canals be dug in a 'Y' shape, from Hangzhou in the south to terminate in (modern) Beijing and in the capital region along the Yellow River valley. When the canal was completed it linked the systems of the Qiantang River, the Yangtze River, the Huai River, the Yellow River, the Wei River and the Hai River. Its southern section, running between Hangzhou and the Yangtze, was named the Jiangnan River (the river ‘South of the Yangtze’). The canal's central portions stretched from Yangzhou to Luoyang; the section between the Yangtze and the Huai continued to the Shanyang River; and the next section connected the Huai to the Yellow River and was called the Tongji Channel. The northernmost portion, linking Beijing and Luoyang, was named the Yongji Channel. This portion of the canal was used to transport troops to what is now the North Korean border region during the Goguryeo-Sui Wars (598–614). After the canal's completion in 609, Emperor Yang led a recorded 105 km (65 mi) long naval flotilla of boats from the north down to his southern capital at Yangzhou.

The Grand Canal at this time was not a continuous, man-made canal, but a collection of often noncontiguous artificial channels and either canalized or natural rivers.

Tang to Yuan dynasties

Although the Tang dynasty (618–907) capital at Chang'an was the most thriving metropolis of China in its day, it was the city of Yangzhou—in proximity to the Grand Canal—that was the economic hub of the Tang era. Besides being the headquarters for the government salt monopoly and the largest pre-modern industrial production center of the empire, Yangzhou was also the geographical midpoint along the north-south trade axis, and so became the major center for southern goods shipped north. One of the greatest benefits of the canal system in the Tang dynasty—and subsequent dynasties—was that it reduced the cost of shipping grain that had been collected in taxes from the Yangtze River Delta to northern China. Minor additions to the canal were made after the Sui period to cut down on travel time, but overall no fundamental differences existed between the Sui Grand Canal and the Tang Grand Canal.

By the year 735, it was recorded that about 149,685,400 kilograms (165,000 short tons) of grain were shipped annually along the canal. The Tang government oversaw canal lock efficiency and built granaries along the route in case a flood or other disaster impeded the path of shipment. To ensure smooth travel of grain shipments, Transport Commissioner Liu Yan (in office from 763 to 779) had special river barge ships designed and constructed to fit the depths of each section of the entire canal.

After the An Shi Rebellion (755–763), the economy of northern China was greatly damaged and never recovered due to wars and to constant flooding of the Yellow River. Such a case occurred in the year 858 when an enormous flood along the Grand Canal inundated thousands of acres of farmland and killed tens of thousands of people in the North China Plain. Such an unfortunate event could reduce the legitimacy of a ruling dynasty by causing others to perceive it as having lost the Mandate of Heaven; this was a good reason for dynastic authorities to maintain a smooth and efficient canal system.

The invention of the water-level-adjusting pound lock in the 10th century CE was done in response to the necessity of greater safety for the travel of barge ships along rougher waters of the Grand Canal.

The city of Kaifeng grew to be a major hub, later becoming the capital of the Song dynasty (960–1279). Although the Tang and Song dynasty international seaports—the greatest being Guangzhou and Quanzhou, respectively—and maritime foreign trade brought merchants great fortune, it was the Grand Canal within China that spurred the greatest amount of economic activity and commercial profit. During the Song and earlier periods, barge ships occasionally crashed and wrecked along the Shanyang Yundao section of the Grand Canal while passing the double slipways, and more often than not those were then robbed of the tax grain by local bandits. This prompted Qiao Weiyue, an Assistant Commissioner of Transport for Huainan, to invent a double-gate system known as the pound lock in the year 984. This allowed ships to wait within a gated space while the water could be drained to appropriate levels; the Chinese also built roofed hangars over the space to add further protection for the ships.

Much of the Grand Canal south of the Yellow River was ruined for several years after 1128, when Du Chong decided to break the dykes and dams holding back the waters of the Yellow River in order to decimate the oncoming Jurchen invaders during the Jin–Song wars. The Jurchen Jin dynasty continually battled with the Song in the region between the Huai River and the Yellow River; this warfare led to the dilapidation of the canal until the Mongols invaded in the 13th century CE and began necessary repairs.

During the Mongol Yuan dynasty (1271–1368) the capital of China was moved to Beijing, eliminating the need for the canal arm flowing west to Kaifeng or Luoyang. A summit section was dug across the foothills of the Shandong massif during the 1280s, shortening the overall length by as much as 700 km (430 mi) (making the total length about 1,800 km (1,100 mi)) and linking Hangzhou and Beijing with a direct north-south waterway for the first time. As in the Song and Jin era, the canal fell into disuse and dilapidation during the Yuan dynasty's decline.

Ming dynasty restoration

The Yongle Emperor (r. 1402–1424) restored the Grand Canal in the Ming era.

The Grand Canal was renovated almost in its entirety between 1411 and 1415 during the Ming dynasty (1368–1644). A magistrate of Jining, Shandong sent a memorandum to the throne of the Yongle Emperor protesting the current inefficient means of transporting 4,000,000 dan (428,000,000 liters) of grain a year by means of transferring it along several different rivers and canals in barge types that went from deep to shallow after the Huai River, and then transferred back onto deep barges once the shipment of grain reached the Yellow River. Chinese engineers built a dam to divert the Wen River to the southwest in order to feed 60% of its water north into the Grand Canal, with the remainder going south. They dug four large reservoirs in Shandong to regulate water levels, which allowed them to avoid pumping water from local sources and water tables. Between 1411 and 1415 a total of 165,000 laborers dredged the canal bed in Shandong and built new channels, embankments, and canal locks.

The Yongle Emperor moved the Ming capital from Nanjing to Beijing in 1403. This move deprived Nanjing of its status as chief political center of China. The reopening of the Grand Canal also benefited Suzhou over Nanjing since the former was in a better position on the main artery of the Grand Canal, and so it became Ming China's greatest economic center. The only other viable contender with Suzhou in the Jiangnan region was Hangzhou, but it was located 200 km (120 mi) further down the Grand Canal and away from the main delta. Even the shipwrecked Korean Choe Bu (1454–1504)—while traveling for five months throughout China in 1488—acknowledged that Hangzhou served not as a competitor but as an economic feeder into the greater Suzhou market. Therefore, the Grand Canal served to make or break the economic fortunes of certain cities along its route, and served as the economic lifeline of indigenous trade within China.

The scholar Gu Yanwu of the early Qing dynasty (1644–1912) estimated that the previous Ming dynasty had to employ 47,004 full-time laborers recruited by the lijia corvée system in order to maintain the entire canal system. It is known that 121,500 soldiers and officers were needed simply to operate the 11,775 government grain barges in the mid-15th century.

Besides its function as a grain shipment route and major vein of river borne indigenous trade in China, the Grand Canal had long been a government-operated courier route as well. In the Ming dynasty, official courier stations were placed at intervals of 35 to 45 km (22 to 28 mi). Each courier station was assigned a different name, all of which were popularized in travel songs of the period.

Qing dynasty and modern China

The Manchus invaded China in the mid-17th century, allowed through the northern passes by the Chinese general Wu Sangui once the Ming capital at Beijing had fallen into the hands of a rebel army. The Manchus established the Qing dynasty (1644–1912), and under their leadership the Grand Canal was overseen and maintained just as in earlier times.

In 1855, the Yellow River flooded and changed its course, severing the course of the canal in Shandong. This was foreseen by a Chinese official in 1447, who remarked that the flood-prone Yellow River made the Grand Canal like a throat that could be easily strangled (leading some officials to request restarting the grain shipments through the East China Sea). In 1855 the dikes of the canal were opened to flood advancing troops of the Taiping Rebellion's Northern Expedition. Because of various factors—the difficulty of crossing the Yellow River, the increased development of an alternative sea route for grain-ships, and the opening of the Tianjin-Pukou Railway and the Beijing-Hankou Railway—the canal languished and for decades the northern and southern parts remained separate. Many of the canal sections fell into disrepair, and some parts were returned to flat fields. Even today, the Grand Canal has not fully recovered from this disaster. After the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, the need for economic development led the authorities to order heavy reconstruction work.

By the 1990s, pollution in the canal had reached the point where boat and barge crews could tell when they were nearing Hangzhou by the stench of the visibly black water. A $250 million restoration project begun in 2001 has improved water quality to the point where it no longer smells, and is once again capable of supporting some fauna.

The economic importance of the canal likely will continue. The governments of the Shandong, Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provinces planned dredging meant to increase shipping capacity by 40 percent by 2012.

On June 22, 2014, The Grand Canal was listed as a World Heritage Site, at the 2014 Conference on World Heritage.

Historical sections

As well as its present-day course, fourteen centuries of canal-building have left the Grand Canal with a number of historical sections. Some of these have disappeared, others are still partially extant, and others form the basis for the modern canal. The following are the most important, but do not form an exhaustive list.

Jia Canal

In 12 BCE, in order to solve the problem of the Grand Canal having to use 160 kilometers (100 mi) of the perilous course of the Yellow River in Northern Jiangsu, a man named Li Hualong created the Jia Canal. Named after the Jia River whose course it followed, it ran 140 kilometers (87 mi) from Xiazhen (modern Weishan) on the shore of Shandong's Weishan Lake to Suqian in Jiangsu. The construction of the Jia Canal left only 100 kilometers (62 mi) of Yellow River navigation on the Grand Canal, from Suqian to Huai'an, which by 1688 had been removed by the construction of the Middle Canal by Jin Fu.

Nanyang New Canal

In 1566, to escape the problems caused by flooding of the Yellow River around Yutai (now on the western shore of Weishan Lake), the Nanyang New Canal was opened. It ran for 75 kilometers (47 mi) from Nanyang (now Nanyang Town, located in the center of Weishan Lake) to the small settlement of Liucheng (in the vicinity of modern Gaolou Village, Weishan County, Shandong) north of Xuzhou City. This change in effect moved the Grand Canal from the low-lying and flood-prone land west of Weishan Lake onto the marginally higher land to its east. It was fed by rivers flowing from east to west from the borders of the Shandong massif.

Huitong Canal

North of the Jizhou Canal summit section, the Huitong Canal ran downhill, fed principally by the River Wen, to join the Wei River at the city of Linqing. In 1289, a geological survey preceded its one-year construction. The Huitong Canal, built by an engineer called Ma Zhizhen, ran across sharply sloping ground and the high concentration of locks gave it the nicknames chahe or zhahe, i.e. 'the river of locks'. Its great number of feeder springs (between two and four hundred, depending on the counting method and season of the year) also led to it being called the quanhe or 'river of springs'.

Jizhou Canal

This, the Grand Canal's first true summit section, was engineered by the Mongol Oqruqči in 1238 to connect Jining to the southern end of the Huitong Canal. It rose to a height of 42 meters (138 ft) above the Yangtze, but environmental and technical factors left it with chronic water shortages until it was re-engineered in 1411 by Song Li of the Ming. Song Li's improvements, recommended by a local man named Bai Ying, included damming the rivers Wen and Guang and drawing lateral canals from them to feed reservoir lakes at the very summit, at a small town called Nanwang.

Duke Huan's Conduit

In 369 CE, General Huan Wen of the Eastern Jin dynasty connected the shallow river valleys of the Huai and the Yellow. He achieved this by joining two of these rivers' tributaries, the Si and the Ji respectively, at their closest point, across a low watershed of the Shandong massif. Huan Wen's primitive summit canal became a model for the engineers of the Jizhou Canal.

Yilou Canal

The Shanyang Canal originally opened onto the Yangtze a short distance south of Yangzhou. As the north shore of the Yangtze gradually silted up to create the sandbank island of Guazhou, it became necessary for boats crossing to and from the Jiangnan Canal to sail the long way around the eastern edge of that island. After a particularly rough crossing of the Yangtze from Zhenjiang, the local prefect realized that a canal dug directly across Guazhou would reduce the journey time and thus make the crossing safer. The Yilou Canal was opened in 738 CE and still exists, though not as part of the modern Grand Canal route.

Modern course

The Grand Canal nominally runs between Beijing and Hangzhou over a total length of 1,794 km (1,115 mi), however, only the section from Hangzhou to Jining is currently navigable. Its course is today divided into seven sections. From south to north these are the Jiangnan Canal, the Inner Canal, the Middle Canal, the Lu Canal, the South Canal, the North Canal, and the Tonghui River.

Jiangnan Canal

The Jiangnan Canal

This southernmost section of the canal runs from Hangzhou in Zhejiang, where the canal connects with the Qiantang River, to Zhenjiang in Jiangsu, where it meets the Yangtze. After leaving Hangzhou the canal passes around the eastern border of Lake Tai, through the major cities of Jiaxing, Suzhou, Wuxi and Changzhou before reaching Zhenjiang. 

Grand Canal tour boats, Suzhou

The Jiangnan (or ‘South of the Yangtze’) Canal is heavily utilized by barge traffic bringing coal and construction materials to the booming delta. It is generally a minimum of 100 meters wide in the congested city centers, and often two or three times this width in the neighboring countryside. In recent years, broad bypass canals have been dug around the major cities to reduce ‘traffic jams’.

The Suzhou section of the Jiangnan Canal flows through the western part of the city. It includes ten city gates and over 20 stone bridges of traditional design and historic areas that have been well preserved as well as temples and pavilions. 

Inner Canal

This ‘Inner Canal’ runs between the Yangtze and Huai'an in Jiangsu, skirting the Shaobo, Lake Gaoyou and Hongze lakes of central Jiangsu. Here the land lying to the west of the canal is higher than its bed while the land to the east is lower. Traditionally the Shanghe region west of the canal has been prone to frequent flooding, while the Xiahe region to its east has been hit by less frequent but immensely damaging inundations caused by failure of the Grand Canal levees. Recent works have allowed floodwaters from Shanghe to be diverted safely out to sea.

Middle Canal

The canal in Jining City

This ‘Middle Canal’ section runs from Huai'an to Weishan Lake, passing through Luoma Lake and following more than one course, the result of the impact of centuries of Yellow River flooding. After Pizhou, a northerly course passes through Tai'erzhuang to enter Weishan Lake at Hanzhuang bound for Nanyang and Jining (this course is the remnant of the New Nanyang Canal of 1566 – see below). A southerly course passes close by Xuzhou and enters Weishan Lake near Peixian. This latter course is less used today.

Lu Canal

At Weishan Lake, both courses enter Shandong province. From here to Linqing, the canal is called the Lu or ‘Shandong’ Canal. It crosses a series of lakes—Zhaoyang, Dushan and Nanyang—which nominally form a continuous body of water. At present, diversions of water mean that the lakes are often largely dry land. North of the northernmost Nanyang Lake is the city of Jining. Further on, about 30 km (19 mi) north of Jining, the highest elevation of the canal (38.5 m or 126 ft above sea level) is reached at the town of Nanwang. In the 1950s a new canal was dug to the south of the old summit section. The old summit section is now dry, while the new canal holds too little water to be navigable. About 50 km (31 mi) further north, passing close by Dongping Lake, the canal reaches the Yellow River. By this point waterless, it no longer connects to the river. It reappears again in Liaocheng City on the north bank where, intermittently flowing through a renovated stone channel, it reaches the city of Linqing on the Shandong – Hebei border.

Southern Canal

The junction of the Lu Canal and South Canal

The fifth section of the canal extends for a distance of 524 kilometers (326 mi) from Linqing to Tianjin along the course of the canalized Wei River. Though one of the northernmost sections, its name derives from its position relative to Tianjin. The Wei River at this point is heavily polluted while drought and industrial water extraction have left it too low to be navigable. The canal, now in Hebei province, passes through the cities of Dezhou and Cangzhou. Although to spectators, the canal appears to be a deep waterway in these city centers, its depth is maintained by weirs and the canal is all but dry where it passes through the surrounding countryside. At its terminus, the canal joins the Hai River in the center of Tianjin City before turning north-west.

Northern Canal and Tonghui River

In Tianjin the canal heads northwest, for a short time following the course of the Yongding, a tributary of the Hai River, before branching off toward Tongzhou on the edge of the municipality of Beijing. It is here that the modern canal stops and that a Grand Canal Cultural Park has been built. During the Yuan dynasty, a further canal on the Tonghui River connected Tongzhou with a wharf called the Houhai or "rear sea" in central Beijing. In the Ming and Qing dynasties, however, the water level in the Tonghui River dropped and it was impossible for ships to travel from Tongzhou to Beijing. Tongzhou then became the northern shipping terminus of the canal. Cargo was unloaded at Tongzhou and transported to Beijing by land. The Tonghui river still exists as a wide, concrete lined storm-channel and drain for the suburbs of Beijing.

Eastern Zhejiang Canal

Main article: Eastern Zhejiang Canal

The Eastern Zhejiang Canal (simplified Chinese: 浙东运河;; traditional Chinese: 浙東運河;; pinyin: zhèdōng yùnhé), also known as the Hangzhou–Ningbo Canal (杭甬运河) is located in Zhejiang. Its west end is in Xixing Street, Binjiang District, Hangzhou City, crossing Cao'e River and Shaoxing City to its east end, the Yong River estuary in Ningbo City. The canal is 239 kilometers (149 mi) long. Early canal construction took place in the Shanyin old canal in Shaoxing City, in the Spring and Autumn period (approximately 771 to 476 BCE). In the third century CE, an official named He Xun supervised the construction of Xixing Canal, establishing the complete Eastern Zhejiang Canal.

In the Southern Song dynasty (1127–1279), the capital was established at Linan, which meant that the Eastern Zhejiang Canal became an important shipping channel. From the Yuan Dynasty (1271–1368) to the Qing Dynasty (1644–1912), the Eastern Zhejiang Canal lost its privilege but still remained navigable. In recent years, because of newer modes of transportation, the canal has been gradually replaced. The reconstruction of the canal began in 2002, by 2007 it was partially navigable, and the renovation project finished in 2009, though the Ningbo section was not navigable until the end of 2013.

In May 2013, the Eastern Zhejiang Canal was listed in the seventh group of Major Historical and Cultural Site Protected at the National Level, and was included in the Grand Canal. In November 2008, as an extension of Beijing-Hangzhou Grand Canal and the passage between the Grand Canal and the Maritime Silk Road, the Eastern Zhejiang Canal was placed into the nomination file in the UNESCO World Heritage program. In 2014, with Beijing-Hangzhou Grand Canal and Sui & Tang Grand Canal, the Eastern Zhejiang Canal became one World Heritage site.

Elevations

Though the canal nominally crosses the watersheds of five river systems, in reality the variation between these is so low that it has only a single summit section. The elevation of the canal bed varies from 1 m below sea level at Hangzhou to 38.5 m above at its summit. At Beijing it reaches 27 m, fed by streams flowing downhill from the mountains to the west. The water flows from Beijing toward Tianjin, from Nanwang north toward Tianjin, and from Nanwang south toward Yangzhou. The water level in the Jiangnan Canal remains scarcely above sea level (the Zhenjiang ridge is 12 meters higher than that of the Yangtze River).

Uses

Transportation

The Grand Canal at its northern terminus at Houhai in Beijing.

From the Tang to Qing dynasties, the Grand Canal served as the main artery between northern and southern China and was essential for the transport of grain to Beijing. Although it was mainly used for shipping grain, it also transported other commodities and the corridor along the canal developed into an important economic belt. Records show that, at its height, every year more than 8,000 boats transported four to six million dan (240,000–360,000 metric tons) of grain. The convenience of transport also enabled rulers to lead inspection tours to southern China. In the Qing dynasty, the Kangxi and Qianlong emperors made twelve trips to the south, on all occasions but one reaching Hangzhou.

The Grand Canal also enabled cultural exchange and political integration to occur between the north and south of China. The canal even made a distinct impression on some of China's early European visitors. Marco Polo recounted the Grand Canal's arched bridges as well as the warehouses and prosperous trade of its cities in the 13th century. The famous Roman Catholic missionary Matteo Ricci traveled from Nanjing to Beijing along the canal at the end of the 16th century.

Since the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949, the canal has been used primarily to transport vast amounts of bulk goods such as bricks, gravel, sand, diesel and coal. The Jianbi shiplocks on the Yangtze are currently handling some 75,000,000 tons each year, and the Li Canal is forecast to reach 100,000,000 tons in the next few years.

Currently, ships can only travel up to Jining. The section from Jining to Beijing is not available for transport due to the silt deposit buildup from the Yellow River and lack of water sources. There are plans on restoring transportation up to Tai'an.

South-North Water Transfer Project

This section's factual accuracy may be compromised due to out-of-date information. Please update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. (March 2012)

Barges on the modern Grand Canal ("Li Canal" section) near Yangzhou

The Grand Canal is currently being upgraded to serve as the Eastern Route of the South-North Water Transfer Project. Additional amounts of water from the Yangtze will be drawn into the canal in Jiangdu City, where a giant 400 m3/s (14,000 cu ft/s) pumping station was already built in the 1980s, and is then fed uphill by pumping stations along the route and through a tunnel under the Yellow River, from where it can flow downhill to reservoirs near Tianjin. Construction on the Eastern Route officially began on December 27, 2002, and water was supposed to reach Tianjin by 2012. However, water pollution has affected the viability of this project.

Notable travelers

In 1169, with China divided between the Jurchen-led Jin dynasty in the north and the Southern Song dynasty in the south, the Southern Song Emperor Xiaozong sent a delegation to the Jurchen to wish their ruler well for the New Year. A scholar-official named Lou Yue, secretary to the delegation, recorded the journey, much of which was made upon the Grand Canal, and submitted his Diary of a Journey to the North to the emperor on his return.

In 1170 the poet, politician and historian Lu You traveled along the Grand Canal from Shaoxing to the river Yangtze, recording his progress in a diary.

In the late 1200s, Marco Polo traveled extensively through China and his trips included time on the Grand Canal, then a major artery for shipping silk, porcelain and wine.

In 1345 Arab traveler Ibn Battuta traveled China and journeyed through the Abe Hayat river (Grand Canal) up to the capital Khanbalik (Beijing).

In 1488, the shipwrecked Korean scholar Choe Bu traveled the entire length of the Grand Canal on his way from Zhejiang to Beijing (and on to Korea), and left a detailed account of his trip.

In 1600, Matteo Ricci traveled to Beijing from Nanjing via the Grand Canal waterway to gain the support of the Wanli Emperor of the Ming dynasty with the help of Wang Zhongde, the Director of the Board of Rites in the central government of China at the time.

In 1793, after a largely fruitless diplomatic mission to Jehol, a large part of Lord Macartney's embassy returned south to the Yangtze delta via the Grand Canal.

In 1848 Robert Fortune reached Hang Chow Foo by the Grand Canal in his quest for tea plants.

See also

History of canals in China

Lingqu Canal

Turpan water system

Dujiangyan irrigation system

Economy of China

Economic history of China (1912–49)

Economic history of China before 1912

Economic history of China

Hydraulic engineering

History of Beijing

References

Citations

^ Hutchinson's Encyclopedia, Encarta. Archived 2009-10-31.

^ a b c d Needham, Volume 4, Part 3, 307.

^ Needham, Volume 4, Part 3, 350–352

^ Needham, Volume 4, Part 3, 308 & 313.

^ Brook, 40–51.

^ a b Needham, Volume 4, Part 3, 271–272.

^ Needham, Volume 4, Part 3, 271.

^ Needham, Volume 4, Part 3, 269–270.

^ Needham, Volume 4, Part 3, 269.

^ a b Needham, Volume 4, Part 3, 270.

^ a b c Ebrey, Cambridge Illustrated History of China, 116.

^ a b c d e Needham, Volume 4, Part 3, 308.

^ Ebrey, Cambridge Illustrated History of China, 114: " the Grand Canal, dug between 605 and 609 by means of enormous levies of conscripted labour."

^ a b Ebrey, Cambridge Illustrated History of China, p. 115

^ a b Benn, 46.

^ Benn, 7.

^ Needham, Volume 4, Part 3, 309.

^ a b Needham, Volume 4, Part 3, 310.

^ a b Needham, Volume 4, Part 3, 311.

^ Bowman, 105.

^ Fairbank, 89.

^ Needham, Volume 4, Part 3, 350–351.

^ a b Needham, Volume 4, Part 3, 351.

^ Needham, Volume 4, Part 3, 266.

^ Needham, Volume 4, Part 3, 227.

^ Brook, 46.

^ Brook, 46–47.

^ a b c d Brook, 47.

^ Brook, 74–75.

^ a b Brook, 75.

^ a b c Brook, 48.

^ Brook, 48–49.

^ Yu, Maochun (2002). The Taiping Rebellion: A Military Assessment of Revolution and Counterrevolution, printed in A Military History of China. David A. Graff & Robin Higham eds. p. 138.

^ On an Ancient Canal, Grunge Gives Way to Grandeur

^ 中国大运河获准列入世界遗产名录 Archived 2016-03-04 at the Wayback Machine

^ "The Grand Canal". Visit Our China. Retrieved 26 November 2018.

^ "Suzhou Grand Canal – Golden Waterway in China". China Discovery. Retrieved 26 November 2018.

^ Gang Xu (2013-10-11). Tourism and Local Development in China: Case Studies of Guilin, Suzhou and Beidaihe. p. 47. ISBN 9781136823404. Retrieved 26 November 2018.

^ China at War: An Encyclopedia ISBN 978-1-598-84415-3 p. 141

^ "京杭运河". Ministry of Water Sources. Retrieved 5 March 2019.

^ "京杭运河山东泰安段预计2019年初全面复航". people.com.cn. Dazhong Ribao. Retrieved 5 March 2019.

^ D'Arcy Brown, Liam, The Emperor's River: Travels to the Heart of a Resurgent China Eye Books, February 2010.

^ Watson, Philip, Grand Canal, Great River (Frances Lincoln, 2007).

^ Jeffrey Hayes (8 August 2013). "Marco Polo's Descriptions of China". Facts and Details. Retrieved 7 December 2018.

^ The missionaries traveled along The Grand Canal – MildChina.com

^ Peyrefitte, Alan, The Collision of Two Civilisations (Harvill, 1993).

^ Coles, Peter (15 October 2019). Mulberry. ISBN 9781789141740.

^ "https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/the-great-british-tea-heist-9866709/". The Great British Tea Heist. External link in |title= (help); Missing or empty |url= (help)

Sources

Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "China" . Encyclopædia Britannica. 6 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 168.

Benn, Charles. (2002). China's Golden Age: Everyday Life in the Tang Dynasty. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-517665-0.

Bishop, Kevin (1997). China's Imperial Way. Hong Kong: Odyssey.

Bowman, John S. (2000). Columbia Chronologies of Asian History and Culture. New York: Columbia University Press.

Brook, Timothy. (1998). The Confusions of Pleasure: Commerce and Culture in Ming China. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-22154-0

Carles, W.R. (1900). The Grand Canal of China. Shanghai: Journal of the North China Branch RAS, Vol. 31, pp. 102–115, 1896-1897 volume, but actually published in 1900.

Ebrey, Patricia Buckley (1999). The Cambridge Illustrated History of China. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-66991-X (paperback).

Fairbank, John King and Merle Goldman (1992). China: A New History; Second Enlarged Edition (2006). Cambridge: MA; London: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-01828-1

Gandar, Dominique (1903). Le Canal Imperial: Etude Historique et Descriptive. Shanghai: Imprimerie de la Mission Catholique. Variétés Sinologiques No. 4.

Garnett, J.W. (1907). Report by Mr. J.W. Garnett of a Journey through the Provinces of Shantung and Kiangsu. British Parliamentary Papers, China No.1, CD3500. London: HMSO.

Hinton, Harold C. (1956). The Grain Tribute System of China (1845-1911). Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Liao Pin, ed. (1987). The Grand Canal: An Odyssey. Beijing: Foreign Languages Press.

Martin, W.A.P. (1897). A Cycle of Cathay.

Needham, Joseph. (1986). Science and Civilization in China: Volume 4, Physics and Physical Technology, Part 3, Civil Engineering and Nautics. Taipei: Caves Books, Ltd. ISBN 0-521-07060-0

New China News Ltd. (1984). The Grand Canal of China. Hong Kong: South China Morning Post Ltd.

Staunton, George (1797). An Authentic Account of an Embassy ...to the Emperor of China.

China’s Ancient Lifeline published May 2013 National Geographic magazine

中国运河, 竞放、杜家驹 主编, 金陵书社 1997年; China's Canal, Jing Fang and Du Jiaju eds, Jinling Book Society, 1997.

External links

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Grand Canal of China.

The Reinvigoration of the Grand Canal

Hangzhou Section of The Grand Canal – EN.GOTOHZ.COM

v

t

e

Zhejiang topics

Hangzhou (capital)

General 
History

Politics

Economy

Geography 
Cities

Huangmaojian

Mount Mogan

Tiantai Mountain

Yangtze River Delta

Grand Canal

Qiantang River

Ou River

Zhoushan Island

Hangzhou Bay

Education 
Zhejiang University

Zhejiang University of Technology

Zhejiang Normal University

Shaoxing University

Culture 
Wuyue culture

Wu Chinese
Taihu Wu
Hangzhou dialect

Ningbo dialect

Wenzhou dialect
(Rui'an dialect)

Jinhua dialect

Quzhou dialect

Southern Min
Zhenan Min

Yue opera

Cuisine 
Longjing tea

Shaoxing wine

Visitor attractions 
Baoguo Temple

Mount Putuo

Tomb of Yu the Great

Mount Tiantai

Qiandao Lake

Guoqing Temple

 Category

 Commons

v

t

e

Jiangsu topics

Nanjing (capital)

General 
History

Politics

Economy

Geography 
Cities

Grand Canal of China

Yellow Sea

East China Sea

Xishan Island

Yangtze River

Lake Tai

Hongze Lake

Yangcheng Lake

Huai River

Qixia Mountain

Education 
Nanjing University

Jiangsu University

Southeast University

Hohai University

Nanjing Normal University

Nanjing University of Science and Technology

Culture 
Wuyue culture

Shuochang

Cuisine

Chinese opera

Ge Yuan Garden

Visitor attractions 
Purple Mountain

Sun Yat-sen Mausoleum

Ming Xiaoling Mausoleum

Jiming Temple

Nanjing Yangtze River Bridge

Hanshan Temple

Huqiu Tower

Grand Buddha at Ling Shan

Chaotian Palace

Qixia Temple

Tianning Temple Pagoda

Zhouzhuang

 Category

 Commons

v

t

e

Transport in China

History

 Proposed public transport

Government

agencies 
Ministry of Transport
Rail

Aviation

Mail

Sea

Space

 Hong Kong*

 Macau*

Road 
Expressways (NTHS)

China National Highways

Road numbering

Rules (Road safety law)

Licence plates

AH1

Gallery road

Zhongshan Road

Automotive industry

Driving License

Rail 
History
Eastern-Qing

South Manchuria

Narrow-gauge

Passenger rail

China Railway
China Railway High-speed

High-speed
Harbin-Beijing–Guangzhou–Hong Kong

Beijing–Kunming

Beijing–Shanghai

Lianyungang–Ürümqi

Shanghai–Chengdu

Shanghai–Kunming

Lines
Beijing–Harbin

Beijing–Shanghai

Beijing–Kowloon

Beijing–Guangzhou

Lanzhou–Lianyungang

Lanzhou–Xinjiang

Lhasa–Xigazê

Qinghai–Tibet

Locomotives

Stations

Rapid transit systems

Maglev

Water

Ports 
Chongqing

Dalian

Guangzhou

Lianyungang

Ningbo-Zhoushan

Qingdao

Rizhao

Shanghai
Yangshan

Shenzhen

Suzhou

Tangshan

Tianjin

Xiamen

Yingkou

Hong Kong*

Canals 
Grand Canal

Lingqu

Red Flag Canal

Zhengguo Canal

Industry 
Shipping industry

China Shipbuilding Industry Corporation

China State Shipbuilding Corporation

Ship lifts

Aviation

Major airlines 
Air China

Cathay Pacific* (Cathay Dragon*)

China Southern Airlines

China Eastern Airlines

Hainan Airlines

Shandong Airlines

Shanghai Airlines

Shenzhen Airlines

Sichuan Airlines

XiamenAir

Airports 
By traffic

Major Airports: Beijing Capital

Chengdu Shuangliu

Guangzhou Baiyun

Hong Kong*

Shenzhen Bao'an

Shanghai Pudong

Shanghai Hongqiao

Industry 
Aviation Industry Corporation of China

China International Aviation & Aerospace Exhibition

Comac

Space 
 Spaceports

Space program

PLA Space Force 

Other topics 
 Transport by province or autonomous region / by city

Bridges

 Tunnels

Chinese New Year Transit

Disasters

* in / related to the special administrative regions

* * *

 Category

Economy

Communications

v

t

e

Major rivers of China

Seven Great Rivers of Eastern China

Yangtze · Yellow · Pearl · Heilongjiang · Huai · 
Hai · Liao

Yangtze system 
Yalong

Min

Dadu

Qingyi (Sichuan)

Tuo

Jialing

Bailong

Fu (Sichuan)

Qu

Wu

Hanshui

Muma

Chi

Du

Bao

Qing

Chishui

Xiang
Xiao

Lei

Mi

Zi

Yuan

Lishui

Miluo

Gan

Fu (Jiangxi)

Xin

Qingyi (Anhui)

Qinhuai

Xitiao

Huangpu

Suzhou Creek

Yellow system 
Daxia

Tao

Qingshui

Wuding

Fen

Wei

Jing

Luo (Henan)

 Luo (Shaanxi)

Qin

Xiaoqing

Pearl system 
North

East

West

Yujiang

Yong

Xun

Qian

Hongshui

Nanpan

Beipan

Rong

Li (Guangxi)

Gui

Liu

Heilongjiang system 
Songhua

2nd Songhua

Nen

Mudan

Ussuri

Argun

Kherlen

Woken

Huifa

Huai system 
Guo

Ying

Shiguan

Quan

Hui

Hong

Hai system 
Chaobai

Yongding

Hutuo

Ziya

Daqing

Wenyu

Juma

Sanggan

Fuyang

Wei

Ju

Jiyunhe

Liao system 
Hun

Taizi

Xar Moron

Xinkai

Western Liao

Eastern Liao

Other major rivers 
Tarim

Black

Karatash

Ili

Shule

Tumen

Yalu

Luan

Red

Minjiang

Longjiang

Lancang

Beilun

Nujiang

Lion Spring

Elephant Spring

Yarlung Tsangpo

Nyang

Subansiri

Irtysh

Suifen

Qiantang

Puyang

Jiao (Shandong)

Dai

Si

Shu

Cao'e

Jiao (Zhejiang)

Ou

Mulan

Jin (Fujian)

Han (Guangdong)
Mei

Ting

Nandu

Wanquan

Taping

Major canals 
Grand Canal

Lingqu

North Jiangsu Main Irrigation Canal

v

t

e

World Heritage Sites in China

East 
Archaeological Ruins of Liangzhu City

Classical Gardens of Suzhou

Fujian Tulou

Lushan

Huangshan

Migratory Bird Sanctuaries along the Coast of Yellow Sea–Bohai Gulf of China (Phase I)

Mount Sanqing

Mount Tai

Wuyi Mountains

Temple and Cemetery of Confucius and Kong Family Mansion in Qufu

Xidi, and Hongcun

West Lake

Kulangsu

South Central 
Ancient Building Complex in the Wudang Mountains

Historic Centre of Macau

Shennongjia

Kaiping Diaolou and Villages

Longmen Grottoes

Historic Monuments of Dengfeng, including the Shaolin Monastery and Gaocheng Observatory

Zuojiang Huashan Rock Art

Wulingyuan

Yinxu

Southwest 
Chengjiang Fossil Site

Dazu Rock Carvings

Fanjingshan

Honghe Hani Rice Terraces

Huanglong

Jiuzhaigou

Lijiang

Mount Emei and Leshan Giant Buddha

Mount Qingcheng and Dujiangyan

Potala Palace, including the Jokhang and Norbulingka

Sichuan Giant Panda Sanctuaries

Three Parallel Rivers

North 
Mount Wutai

Chengde Mountain Resort, including Putuo Zongcheng Temple, Xumi Fushou Temple and Puning Temple

Forbidden City

Zhoukoudian

Ancient City of Pingyao

Summer Palace

Temple of Heaven

Xanadu

Yungang Grottoes

Northeast 
Koguryo sites

Mukden Palace

Northwest 
Mausoleum of the First Qin Emperor

Mogao Caves

Xinjiang Tianshan

Qinghai Hoh Xil

Multiple regions 
Great Wall

China Danxia

Imperial Tombs of the Ming and Qing Dynasties

South China Karst

Grand Canal

Silk Roads

Tusi Sites

Coordinates: 30°15′41″N 120°13′26″E / 30.26139°N 120.22389°E / 30.26139; 120.22389
