"Hungarian philosopher and critic

This article is about the philosopher. For the politician, see György Lukács (politician).

The native form of this personal name is Lukács György. This article uses Western name order when mentioning individuals.

György Lukács

Lukács in 1952

Born György Bernát Löwinger

13 April 1885

Budapest, Austria-Hungary

Died 4 June 1971(1971-06-04) (aged 86)

Budapest, Hungarian People's Republic

Education Royal Hungarian University of Kolozsvár (Dr. rer. oec., 1906)

University of Berlin (1906–1907; no degree)

Royal Hungarian University of Budapest (PhD, 1909)

Spouse(s) Jelena Grabenko

Gertrúd Jánosi (née Bortstieber)

Awards Order of the Red Banner (1969)

Era 20th-century philosophy

Region Western philosophy

School Neo-Kantianism (1906–1918)

Western Marxism/Hegelian Marxism (after 1918)

Thesis A drámaírás főbb irányai a múlt század utolsó negyedében (The Main Directions of Drama-Writing in the Last Quarter of the Past Century) (1909)

Doctoral advisor Zsolt Beöthy (1909 PhD thesis advisor)

Other academic advisors Georg Simmel

Main interests

Political philosophy, social theory, literary theory, aesthetics, Marxist humanism

Notable ideas

Reification, class consciousness, transcendental homelessness, the genre of tragedy as an ethical category

Influences

Immanuel Kant, G. W. F. Hegel, Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, Max Weber, Georg Simmel, Wilhelm Dilthey, Emil Lask, Georges Sorel, Vladimir Lenin, Rosa Luxemburg, Søren Kierkegaard

Influenced

The Frankfurt School, The Praxis School, The Budapest School, Walter Benjamin, Andrew Arato, Lucien Goldmann, Imre Lakatos, Karl Polanyi, Guy Debord, Cornelius Castoriadis, Tom Rockmore, Moishe Postone, Sandra Harding, Richard D. Wolff, Costanzo Preve, Leszek Kołakowski, Karel Kosík, Fredric Jameson

György Bernát Löwinger, (13 April 1885 – 4 June 1971), better known as György Lukács, also known as Georg Bernard Baron Lukács von Szegedin; was a Hungarian Marxist philosopher, aesthetician, literary historian, and critic. He was one of the founders of Western Marxism, an interpretive tradition that departed from the Marxist ideological orthodoxy of the Soviet Union. He developed the theory of reification, and contributed to Marxist theory with developments of Karl Marx's theory of class consciousness. He was also a philosopher of Leninism. He ideologically developed and organised Lenin's pragmatic revolutionary practices into the formal philosophy of vanguard-party revolution.

As a literary critic Lukács was especially influential due to his theoretical developments of realism and of the novel as a literary genre. In 1919, he was appointed the Hungarian Minister of Culture of the government of the short-lived Hungarian Soviet Republic (March–August 1919).

Lukács has been described as the preeminent Marxist intellectual of the Stalinist era, though assessing his legacy can be difficult as Lukács seemed both to support Stalinism as the embodiment of Marxist thought, and yet also to champion a return to pre-Stalinist Marxism.

Contents

1 Life and politics

1.1 Pre-Marxist period

1.2 Communist leader

1.3 Under Stalin and Rákosi

1.4 De-Stalinisation

2 Work

2.1 History and Class Consciousness

2.1.1 What is Orthodox Marxism?

2.1.2 Reification and the Consciousness of the Proletariat

2.2 Literary and aesthetic work

2.3 "Realism in the Balance" and defence of literary realism

2.4 Ontology of social being

3 Bibliography

4 See also

5 Notes

6 References

6.1 Sources

7 Further reading

8 External links

Life and politics

Lukács was born Löwinger György Bernát in Budapest, Austria-Hungary, to the investment banker József Löwinger (later Szegedi Lukács József; 1855–1928) and his wife Adele Wertheimer (Wertheimer Adél; 1860–1917), who were a wealthy Jewish family. He had a brother and sister.

His father was knighted by the empire and received a baronial title, making Lukács a baron as well through inheritance. As an Austro-Hungarian subject, the full names of Lukács were the German Baron Georg Bernhard Lukács von Szegedin and the Hungarian szegedi Lukács György Bernát. As a writer, he published under the names Georg Lukács and György Lukács. Lukács participated in intellectual circles in Budapest, Berlin, Florence and Heidelberg. He received his doctorate in economic and political sciences (Dr. rer. oec.) in 1906 from the Royal Hungarian University of Kolozsvár. In 1909, he completed his doctorate in philosophy at the University of Budapest under the direction of Zsolt Beöthy.

Pre-Marxist period

Whilst at university in Budapest, Lukács was part of socialist intellectual circles through which he met Ervin Szabó, an anarcho-syndicalist who introduced him to the works of Georges Sorel (1847–1922), the French proponent of revolutionary syndicalism. In that period, Lukács's intellectual perspectives were modernist and anti-positivist. From 1904 to 1908, he was part of a theatre troupe that produced modernist, psychologically realistic plays by Henrik Ibsen, August Strindberg, and Gerhart Hauptmann.

Lukács spent much time in Germany, and studied at the University of Berlin from 1906 to 1907, during which time he made the acquaintance of the philosopher Georg Simmel. Later in 1913 whilst in Heidelberg, he befriended Max Weber, Emil Lask, Ernst Bloch, and Stefan George. The idealist system to which Lukács subscribed at this time was intellectually indebted to neo-Kantianism (then the dominant philosophy in German universities) and to Plato, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Søren Kierkegaard, Wilhelm Dilthey, and Fyodor Dostoyevsky. In that period, he published Soul and Form (Die Seele und die Formen, Berlin, 1911; tr. 1974) and The Theory of the Novel (1916/1920; tr. 1971).

After the beginning of the First World War, Lukács was exempted from military service. In 1914, he married the Russian political activist Jelena Grabenko.

In 1915, Lukács returned to Budapest, where he was the leader of the "Sunday Circle", an intellectual salon. Its concerns were the cultural themes that arose from the existential works of Dostoyevsky, which thematically aligned with Lukács's interests in his last years at Heidelberg. As a salon, the Sunday Circle sponsored cultural events whose participants included literary and musical avant-garde figures, such as Karl Mannheim, the composer Béla Bartók, Béla Balázs, Arnold Hauser, Zoltán Kodály and Karl Polanyi; some of them also attended the weekly salons. In 1918, the last year of the First World War (1914–1918), the Sunday Circle became divided. They dissolved the salon because of their divergent politics; several of the leading members accompanied Lukács into the Communist Party of Hungary.

Communist leader

Lukács in 1919

In light of the First World War and the Russian Revolution of 1917, Lukács rethought his ideas. He became a committed Marxist in this period and joined the fledgling Communist Party of Hungary in 1918. As part of the government of the short-lived Hungarian Soviet Republic, Lukács was made People's Commissar for Education and Culture (he was deputy to the Commissar for Education Zsigmond Kunfi).

It is said by József Nádass that Lukács was giving a lecture entitled "Old Culture and New Culture" to a packed hall when the republic was proclaimed which was interrupted due to the revolution.

During the Hungarian Soviet Republic, Lukács was a theoretician of the Hungarian version of the red terror. In an article in the Népszava, 15 April 1919, he wrote that "The possession of the power of the state is also a moment for the destruction of the oppressing classes. A moment, we have to use". Lukács later became a commissar of the Fifth Division of the Hungarian Red Army, in which capacity he ordered the execution of eight of his own soldiers in Poroszlo, in May 1919, which he later admitted in an interview.

After the Hungarian Soviet Republic was defeated, Lukács was ordered by Kun to remain behind with Ottó Korvin, when the rest of the leadership evacuated. Lukács and Korvin's mission was to clandestinely reorganize the communist movement, but this proved to be impossible. Lukács went into hiding, with the help of photographer Olga Máté. After Korvin's capture in 1919, Lukács fled from Hungary to Vienna. He was arrested but was saved from extradition due to a group of writers including Thomas and Heinrich Mann. Thomas Mann later based the character Naphta on Lukács in his novel The Magic Mountain.

He married his second wife, Gertrúd Bortstieber in 1919 in Vienna, a fellow member of the Hungarian Communist Party.

During his time in Vienna in the 1920s, Lukács befriended other Left Communists who were working or in exile there, including Victor Serge, Adolf Joffe and Antonio Gramsci. Around that time, Lukács began to develop Leninist ideas in the field of philosophy. His major works in this period were the essays collected in his magnum opus History and Class Consciousness (Geschichte und Klassenbewußtsein, Berlin, 1923). Although these essays display signs of what Vladimir Lenin referred to as "ultra-leftism", they provided Leninism with a substantive philosophical basis. In July 1924, Grigory Zinoviev attacked this book along with the work of Karl Korsch at the Fifth Comintern Congress.

In 1924, shortly after Lenin's death, Lukács published in Vienna the short study Lenin: A Study in the Unity of His Thought (Lenin: Studie über den Zusammenhang seiner Gedanken). In 1925, he published a critical review of Nikolai Bukharin's manual of historical materialism.

As a Hungarian exile, he remained active on the left wing of Hungarian Communist Party, and was opposed to the Moscow-backed programme of Béla Kun. His "Blum theses" of 1928 called for the overthrow of the counter-revolutionary regime of Admiral Horthy in Hungary by a strategy similar to the Popular Fronts that arose in the 1930s. He advocated a "democratic dictatorship" of the proletariat and peasantry as a transitional stage leading to the dictatorship of the proletariat. After Lukács's strategy was condemned by the Comintern, he retreated from active politics into theoretical work.

Lukács left Vienna in 1929 first for Berlin, then for Budapest.

Under Stalin and Rákosi

In 1930, while residing in Budapest, Lukács was summoned to Moscow. This coincided with the signing of a Viennese police order for his expulsion. Leaving their children to attend their studies, Lukács and his wife ventured to Moscow in March 1930. Soon after his arrival, Lukács was "prevented" from leaving and assigned to work alongside David Riazanov ("in the basement") at the Marx–Engels Institute.

Lukács returned to Berlin in 1931 and in 1933 he once again left Berlin for Moscow to attend the Institute of Philosophy of the Russian Academy of Sciences. During this time, Lukács first came into contact with the unpublished works of the young Marx.

Lukács and his wife were not permitted to leave the Soviet Union until after the Second World War. During Stalin's Great Purge, Lukács was sent to internal exile in Tashkent for a time, where he and Johannes Becher became friends. Lukács survived the purges of the Great Terror, which claimed the lives of an estimated 80% of the Hungarian émigrés in the Soviet Union. There is much debate among historians concerning the extent to which Lukács accepted Stalinism.

In 1945, Lukács and his wife returned to Hungary. As a member of the Hungarian Communist Party, he took part in establishing the new Hungarian government. From 1945 Lukács was a member of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences. Between 1945 and 1946 he strongly criticised non-communist philosophers and writers. Lukács has been accused of playing an "administrative" (legal-bureaucratic) role in the removal of independent and non-communist intellectuals such as Béla Hamvas, István Bibó, Lajos Prohászka, and Károly Kerényi from Hungarian academic life. Between 1946 and 1953, many non-communist intellectuals, including Bibó, were imprisoned or forced into menial work or manual labour.

Lukács's personal aesthetic and political position on culture was always that socialist culture would eventually triumph in terms of quality. He thought it should play out in terms of competing cultures, not by "administrative" measures. In 1948–49 Lukács's position for cultural tolerance was smashed in a "Lukács purge," when Mátyás Rákosi turned his famous salami tactics on the Hungarian Communist Party.

In the mid-1950s, Lukács was reintegrated into party life. The party used him to help purge the Hungarian Writers' Union in 1955–1956. Tamás Aczél and Tibor Méray (former Secretaries of the Hungarian Writers' Union) both believe that Lukács participated grudgingly, and cite Lukács leaving the presidium and the meeting at the first break as evidence of this reluctance.

De-Stalinisation

In 1956, Lukács became a minister of the brief communist revolutionary government led by Imre Nagy, which opposed the Soviet Union. At this time Lukács's daughter led a short-lived party of communist revolutionary youth. Lukács's position on the 1956 revolution was that the Hungarian Communist Party would need to retreat into a coalition government of socialists, and slowly rebuild its credibility with the Hungarian people. While a minister in Nagy's revolutionary government, Lukács also participated in trying to reform the Hungarian Communist Party on a new basis. This party, the Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party, was rapidly co-opted by János Kádár after 4 November 1956.

During the 1956 Hungarian Revolution, Lukács was present at debates of the anti-party and revolutionary communist Petőfi Society while remaining part of the party apparatus. During the revolution, as mentioned in Budapest Diary, Lukács argued for a new Soviet-aligned communist party. In Lukács's view, the new party could win social leadership only by persuasion instead of force. Lukács envisioned an alliance between the dissident communist Hungarian Revolutionary Youth Party, the revolutionary Hungarian Social Democratic Party and his own Soviet-aligned party as a very junior partner.

Following the defeat of the Revolution, Lukács was deported to the Socialist Republic of Romania with the rest of Nagy's government. Unlike Nagy, he avoided execution, albeit narrowly. Due to his role in Nagy's government, he was no longer trusted by the party apparatus. Lukács's followers were indicted for political crimes throughout the 1960s and '70s, and a number fled to the West. Lukács's books The Young Hegel (Der junge Hegel, Zurich, 1948) and The Destruction of Reason (Die Zerstörung der Vernunft, Berlin, 1954) have been used to argue that Lukács was covertly critical of Stalinism as an irrational distortion of Hegelian-Marxism.

He returned to Budapest in 1957. Lukács publicly abandoned his positions of 1956 and engaged in self-criticism. Having abandoned his earlier positions, Lukács remained loyal to the Communist Party until his death in 1971. In his last years, following the uprisings in France and Czechoslovakia in 1968, Lukács became more publicly critical of the Soviet Union and Hungarian Communist Party.

In an interview just before his death, Lukács remarked: 

Without a genuine general theory of society and its movement, one does not get away from Stalinism. Stalin was a great tactician... But Stalin, unfortunately, was not a Marxist... The essence of Stalinism lies in placing tactics before strategy, practice above theory... The bureaucracy generated by Stalinism is a tremendous evil. Society is suffocated by it. Everything becomes unreal, nominalistic. People see no design, no strategic aim, and do not move..." Thus Lukács concludes "e must learn to connect the great decisions of popular political power with personal needs, those of individuals.

— Marcus, Judith; Zoltan, Tarr (1989). pp. 215–216

Work

 Part of a series on

Marxism

Theoretical works

Economic and Philosophic

Manuscripts of 1844

Theses on Feuerbach

The German Ideology

Wage Labour and Capital

The Communist Manifesto

The Eighteenth Brumaire of

Louis Napoleon

Grundrisse der Kritik

der Politischen Ökonomie

A Contribution to the

Critique of Political Economy

Das Kapital

Critique of the Gotha Program

Dialectics of Nature

Philosophy

Economic determinism

Historical materialism

Marx's dialectic

Marx's method

Philosophy of nature

Economics

Capital (accumulation)

Crisis theory

Commodity

Exploitation

Factors of production

Means of labor

Means of production

Mode of production
Asiatic

Capitalist

Socialist

Law of value

Productive forces

Scientific socialism

Surplus product

Surplus value

Value-form

Wage labor

Sociology

Alienation

Base and superstructure

Bourgeoisie

Class

Class consciousness

Class struggle

Classless society

Commodity fetishism

Communist society

Cultural hegemony

Dictatorship of the proletariat

Exploitation

Free association

General intellect

Human nature

Ideology

Immiseration

Lumpenproletariat

Metabolic rift

Proletariat

Private property

Relations of production

Reification

State theory

Social metabolism

Working class

History

Anarchism and Marxism

Philosophy in the Soviet Union

Primitive accumulation

Proletarian revolution

Proletarian internationalism

World revolution

Young Marx

Aspects

Aesthetics

Archaeology

Criminology

Feminism

Film theory

Geography

Historiography

Literary criticism

Marxism and religion

Variants

Analytical

Austro

Budapest School

Classical

Democratic socialism

Eurocommunism

Frankfurt School

Freudian

Hegelian

Humanist

Impossibilism

Instrumental

Libertarian
Autonomism

Council communism

De Leonism

Left communism
Bordigism

Leninism
Marxism–Leninism
Maoism

Trotskyism

Neo-Gramscianism

Neo-

Neue Marx-Lektüre

Open

Orthodox

Political

Post-

Revisionist

Praxis School

Social democracy

Structural

Western

People

Karl Marx

Engels

Bebel

Bernstein

De Leon

Kautsky

Eleanor Marx

Debs

Hardie

Plekhanov

Zetkin

Gorky

Connolly

Lenin

Luxemburg

Liebknecht

Kollontai

Pannekoek

Stalin

Trotsky

Borochov

Lukács

Korsch

Gramsci

Benjamin

Mao

Horkheimer

Ibárruri

Reich

Aragon

Brecht

Marcuse

Fromm

Lefebvre

Adorno

Sartre

Rubel

Beauvoir

Allende

Dunayevskaya

Mills

Hobsbawm

Althusser

Pasolini

Zinn

Miliband

Parenti

Bauman

Guevara

Castro

Debord

Fanon

Harvey

Wolff

Sankara

Žižek

Varoufakis

Ho

Related topics

Critical theory

Criticism of Marxism

Communism

History of communism

Left-wing politics
Old Left

New Left

Social anarchism
Anarcho-communism

Socialism
Libertarian

Revolutionary

Utopian

Related categories

► Karl Marx

Outline

 Communism portal

 Philosophy portal

 Socialism portal

v

t

e

History and Class Consciousness

Further information: History and Class Consciousness

Written between 1919 and 1922 and published in 1923, Lukács's collection of essays History and Class Consciousness contributed to debates concerning Marxism and its relation to sociology, politics and philosophy. With this work, Lukács initiated the current of thought that came to be known as "Western Marxism".

The most important essay in Lukács's book introduces the concept of "reification". In capitalist societies, human properties, relations and actions are transformed into properties, relations and actions of man-produced things, which become independent of man and govern his life. These man-created things are then imagined to be originally independent of man. Moreover, human beings are transformed into thing-like beings which do not behave in a human way but according to the laws of the thing-world. This essay is notable for reconstructing aspects of Marx's theory of alienation before the publication of the Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844, in which Marx most clearly expounds the theory. 

Lukács also develops the Marxist theory of class consciousness - the distinction between the objective situation of a class and that class's subjective awareness of this situation. Lukács proffers a view of a class as an "historical imputed subject". An empirically existing class can only successfully act when it becomes conscious of its historical situation, i.e. when it transforms from a "class in itself" to a "class for itself". Lukács's theory of class consciousness has been influential within the sociology of knowledge.

In his later career, Lukács repudiated the ideas of History and Class Consciousness, in particular the belief in the proletariat as a "subject-object of history" (1960 Postface to French translation). As late as 1925–1926, he still defended these ideas, in an unfinished manuscript, which he called Tailism and the Dialectic. It was not published until 1996 in Hungarian and English in 2000 under the title A Defence of History and Class Consciousness.

What is Orthodox Marxism?

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Lukács argues that methodology is the only thing that distinguishes Marxism: even if all its substantive propositions were rejected, it would remain valid because of its distinctive method:

Orthodox Marxism, therefore, does not imply the uncritical acceptance of the results of Marx's investigations. It is not the 'belief' in this or that thesis, nor the exegesis of a 'sacred' book. On the contrary, orthodoxy refers exclusively to method. It is the scientific conviction that dialectical materialism is the road to truth and that its methods can be developed, expanded and deepened only along the lines laid down by its founders.

— §1

He criticises Marxist revisionism by calling for the return to this Marxist method, which is fundamentally dialectical materialism. Lukács conceives "revisionism" as inherent to the Marxist theory, insofar as dialectical materialism is, according to him, the product of class struggle: 

For this reason the task of orthodox Marxism, its victory over Revisionism and utopianism can never mean the defeat, once and for all, of false tendencies. It is an ever-renewed struggle against the insidious effects of bourgeois ideology on the thought of the proletariat. Marxist orthodoxy is no guardian of traditions, it is the eternally vigilant prophet proclaiming the relation between the tasks of the immediate present and the totality of the historical process.

— end of §5

According to him, "The premise of dialectical materialism is, we recall: 'It is not men's consciousness that determines their existence, but on the contrary, their social existence that determines their consciousness.' ...Only when the core of existence stands revealed as a social process can existence be seen as the product, albeit the hitherto unconscious product, of human activity." (§5). In line with Marx's thought, he criticises the individualist bourgeois philosophy of the subject, which founds itself on the voluntary and conscious subject. Against this ideology, he asserts the primacy of social relations. Existence – and thus the world – is the product of human activity; but this can be seen only if the primacy of social process on individual consciousness is accepted. Lukács does not restrain human liberty for sociological determinism: to the contrary, this production of existence is the possibility of praxis.

He conceives the problem in the relationship between theory and practice. Lukács quotes Marx's words: "It is not enough that thought should seek to realise itself; reality must also strive towards thought." How does the thought of intellectuals relate to class struggle, if theory is not simply to lag behind history, as it is in Hegel's philosophy of history ("Minerva always comes at the dusk of night...")? Lukács criticises Friedrich Engels's Anti-Dühring, saying that he "does not even mention the most vital interaction, namely the dialectical relation between subject and object in the historical process, let alone give it the prominence it deserves." This dialectical relation between subject and object is the basis of Lukács's critique of Immanuel Kant's epistemology, according to which the subject is the exterior, universal and contemplating subject, separated from the object.

For Lukács, "ideology" is a projection of the class consciousness of the bourgeoisie, which functions to prevent the proletariat from attaining consciousness of its revolutionary position. Ideology determines the "form of objectivity", thus the very structure of knowledge. According to Lukács, real science must attain the "concrete totality" through which only it is possible to think the current form of objectivity as a historical period. Thus, the so-called eternal "laws" of economics are dismissed as the ideological illusion projected by the current form of objectivity ("What is Orthodoxical Marxism?", §3). He also writes: "It is only when the core of being has showed itself as social becoming, that the being itself can appear as a product, so far unconscious, of human activity, and this activity, in turn, as the decisive element of the transformation of being." ("What is Orthodoxical Marxism?", §5) Finally, "orthodoxical marxism" is not defined as interpretation of Capital as if it were the Bible or an embrace of "marxist thesis", but as fidelity to the "marxist method", dialectics.

Reification and the Consciousness of the Proletariat

Drawing from the insights of Max Weber and Georg Simmel and Marx's magnum opus Capital, as well as Hegel's concept of appearance, Lukács argues that commodity fetishism is the central structural problem of capitalist society. The essence of the commodity structure is that a relation between people takes on the character of a thing. Society subordinates production entirely to the increase of exchange-value and crystallises relations between human beings in to object-values. The commodity's fundamental nature is concealed: it appears to have autonomy and acquires a phantom objectivity.
There are two sides to commodity fetishism: "Objectively a world of objects and relations between things springs into being (the world of commodities and their movements on the market) Subjectively - where the market economy has been fully developed - a man's activity becomes estranged from himself, it turns into a commodity which, subject to the non-human objectivity of the natural laws of society, must go its own way independently of man just like any consumer article." A man is no longer a specific individual but part of a huge system of production and exchange. He is a mere unit of labour power, an article to be bought and sold according to the laws of the market. The principle of rationalisation of the productive mechanism based on what is and can be calculated extends to all fields, including human consciousness. Legal systems disregard tradition and reduce individuals to juridical units. Division of labour becomes increasingly specialised and particularised, confining the individual's productive activity to a more and more narrow range of skills.

As the bourgeoisie plays the dominant role in this system, it is contrary to its own interests to understand the system's transient historical character. Its consciousness is mystified. Bourgeois philosophy understands only empirical reality or normative ethics; it lacks the cognitive ability to grasp reality as a whole. Bourgeois rationalism has no interest in phenomena beyond what is calculable and predictable. Only the proletariat, which has no interest in the maintenance of capitalism, can relate to reality in a practical revolutionary way. When the proletariat becomes aware of its situation as a mere commodity in bourgeois society, it will be able to understand the social mechanism as a whole. The self-knowledge of the proletariat is more than just a perception of the world; it is a historical movement of emancipation, a liberation of humanity from the tyranny of reification.

Literary and aesthetic work

In addition to his standing as a Marxist political thinker, Lukács was an influential literary critic of the twentieth century. His important work in literary criticism began early in his career, with The Theory of the Novel, a seminal work in literary theory and the theory of genre. The book is a history of the novel as a form, and an investigation into its distinct characteristics. In The Theory of the Novel, he coins the term "transcendental homelessness", which he defines as the "longing of all souls for the place in which they once belonged, and the 'nostalgia… for utopian perfection, a nostalgia that feels itself and its desires to be the only true reality'".

Lukács later repudiated The Theory of the Novel, writing a lengthy introduction that described it as erroneous, but nonetheless containing a "romantic anti-capitalism" which would later develop into Marxism. (This introduction also contains his famous dismissal of Theodor Adorno and others in Western Marxism as having taken up residence in the "Grand Hotel Abyss".)

Lukács's later literary criticism includes the well-known essay "Kafka or Thomas Mann?", in which Lukács argues for the work of Thomas Mann as a superior attempt to deal with the condition of modernity, and criticises Franz Kafka's brand of modernism. Lukács steadfastly opposed the formal innovations of modernist writers like Kafka, James Joyce, and Samuel Beckett, preferring the traditional aesthetic of realism.

During his time in Moscow in the 1930s, Lukács worked on Marxist views of aesthetics while belonging to the group around an influential Moscow magazine "The Literary Critic" (Literaturny Kritik). The editor of this magazine, Mikhail Lifshitz, was an important Soviet author on aesthetics. Lifshitz' views were very similar to Lukács's insofar as both argued for the value of the traditional art; despite the drastic difference in age (Lifschitz was much younger) both Lifschitz and Lukács indicated that their working relationship at that time was a collaboration of equals. Lukács contributed frequently to this magazine, which was also followed by Marxist art theoreticians around the world through various translations published by the Soviet government.

The collaboration between Lifschitz and Lukács resulted in the formation of an informal circle of the like-minded Marxist intellectuals connected to the journal Literaturnyi Kritik , published monthly starting in the summer of 1933 by the Organisational Committee of the Writers' Union. ... A group of thinkers formed around Lifschitz, Lukács and Andrei Platonov; they were concerned with articulating the aesthetical views of Marx and creating a kind of Marxist aesthetics that had not yet been properly formulated.

Lukács famously argued for the revolutionary character of the novels of Sir Walter Scott and Honoré de Balzac. Lukács felt that both authors' nostalgic, pro-aristocratic politics allowed them accurate and critical stances because of their opposition (albeit reactionary) to the rising bourgeoisie. This view was expressed in his later book The Historical Novel (published in Russian in 1937, then in Hungarian in 1947), as well as in his essay "Realism in the Balance" (1938).

The Historical Novel is probably Lukács's most influential work of literary history. In it he traces the development of the genre of historical fiction. While prior to 1789, he argues, people's consciousness of history was relatively underdeveloped, the French Revolution and Napoleonic wars that followed brought about a realisation of the constantly changing, evolving character of human existence. This new historical consciousness was reflected in the work of Sir Walter Scott, whose novels use 'representative' or 'typical' characters to dramatise major social conflicts and historical transformations, for example the dissolution of feudal society in the Scottish Highlands and the entrenchment of mercantile capitalism. Lukács argues that Scott's new brand of historical realism was taken up by Balzac and Tolstoy, and enabled novelists to depict contemporary social life not as a static drama of fixed, universal types, but rather as a moment of history, constantly changing, open to the potential of revolutionary transformation. For this reason he sees these authors as progressive and their work as potentially radical, despite their own personal conservative politics.

For Lukács, this historical realist tradition began to give way after the 1848 revolutions, when the bourgeoisie ceased to be a progressive force and their role as agents of history was usurped by the proletariat. After this time, historical realism begins to sicken and lose its concern with social life as inescapably historical. He illustrates this point by comparing Flaubert's historical novel Salammbô to that of the earlier realists. For him, Flaubert's work marks a turning away from relevant social issues and an elevation of style over substance. Why he does not discuss Sentimental Education, a novel much more overtly concerned with recent historical developments, is not clear. For much of his life Lukács promoted a return to the realist tradition that he believed it had reached its height with Balzac and Scott, and bemoaned the supposed neglect of history that characterised modernism.

The Historical Novel has been hugely influential in subsequent critical studies of historical fiction, and no serious analyst of the genre fails to engage at some level with Lukács's arguments.

"Realism in the Balance" and defence of literary realism

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

"Realism in the Balance" is a 1938 essay by Georg Lukács (written while he lived in Soviet Russia and first published in a German literary journal) in which he defends the "traditional" realism of authors like Thomas Mann in the face of rising Modernist movements, such as Expressionism, Surrealism, and Naturalism. Practitioners of these movements, such as James Joyce, placed an emphasis on displaying the discord and disenchantment of modern life through techniques that highlight individualism and individual consciousness, such as stream of consciousness. In his essay, Lukács presents a complex, nuanced view of these movements and their relation to what he regards as "true" realism: On the one hand, Lukács argues that such movements are a historical necessity, but he also strongly expresses the sentiment that these new artistic movements lack what he views as revolutionary power.

The initial intent of "Realism in the Balance", stated at its outset, is debunking the claims of those defending Expressionism as a valuable literary movement. Lukács addresses the discordance in the community of modernist critics, whom he regarded as incapable of deciding which writers were Expressionist and which were not, arguing that "perhaps there is no such thing as an Expressionist writer".

Although his aim is ostensibly to criticise what he perceived as the over-valuation of modernist schools of writing at the time the article was published, Lukács uses the essay as an opportunity to advance his formulation of the desirable alternative to these schools. He rejects the notion that modern art must necessarily manifest itself as a litany of sequential movements, beginning with Naturalism, and proceeding through Impressionism and Expressionism to culminate in Surrealism. For Lukács, the important issue at stake was not the conflict that results from the modernists' evolving oppositions to classical forms, but rather the ability of art to confront an objective reality that exists in the world, an ability he found almost entirely lacking in modernism.

Lukács believed that desirable alternative to such modernism must therefore take the form of Realism, and he enlists the realist authors Maxim Gorky, Thomas and Heinrich Mann, and Romain Rolland to champion his cause. To frame the debate, Lukács introduces the arguments of critic Ernst Bloch, a defender of Expressionism, and the author to whom Lukács was chiefly responding. He maintains that modernists such as Bloch are too willing to ignore the realist tradition, an ignorance that he believes derives from a modernist rejection of a crucial tenet of Marxist theory, a rejection which he quotes Bloch as propounding. This tenet is the belief that the system of capitalism is "an objective totality of social relations," and it is fundamental to Lukács's arguments in favour of realism.

He explains that the pervasiveness of capitalism, the unity in its economic and ideological theory, and its profound influence on social relations comprise a "closed integration" or "totality," an objective whole that functions independent of human consciousness. Lukács cites Marx to bolster this historical materialist worldview: "The relations of production in every society form a whole." He further relies on Marx to argue that the bourgeoisie's unabated development of the world's markets are so far-reaching as to create a unified totality, and explains that because the increasing autonomy of elements of the capitalist system (such as the autonomy of currency) is perceived by society as "crisis," there must be an underlying unity that binds these seemingly autonomous elements of the capitalist system together, and makes their separation appear as crisis. 

Returning to modernist forms, Lukács stipulates that such theories disregard the relationship of literature to objective reality, in favour of the portrayal of subjective experience and immediacy that do little to evince the underlying capitalist totality of existence. It is clear that Lukács regards the representation of reality as art's chief purpose—in this he is perhaps not in disagreement with the modernists—but he maintains that "If a writer strives to represent reality as it truly is, i.e. if he is an authentic realist, then the question of totality plays a decisive role." "True realists" demonstrate the importance of the social context, and since the unmasking of this objective totality is a crucial element in Lukács's Marxist ideology, he privileges their authorial approach.

Lukács then sets up a dialectical opposition between two elements he believes inherent to human experience. He maintains that this dialectical relation exists between the "appearance" of events as subjective, unfettered experiences and their "essence" as provoked by the objective totality of capitalism. Lukács explains that good realists, such as Thomas Mann, create a contrast between the consciousnesses of their characters (appearance) and a reality independent of them (essence). According to Lukács, Mann succeeds because he creates this contrast. Conversely, modernist writers fail because they portray reality only as it appears to themselves and their characters—subjectively—and "fail to pierce the surface" of these immediate, subjective experiences "to discover the underlying essence, i.e. the real factors that relate their experiences to the hidden social forces that produce them." The pitfalls of relying on immediacy are manifold, according to Lukács. Because the prejudices inculcated by the capitalist system are so insidious, they cannot be escaped without the abandonment of subjective experience and immediacy in the literary sphere. They can only be superseded by realist authors who "abandon and transcend the limits of immediacy, by scrutinising all subjective experiences and measuring them against social reality;" this is no easy task. Lukács relies on Hegelian dialectics to explain how the relationship between this immediacy and abstraction effects a subtle indoctrination on the part of capitalist totality. The circulation of money, he explains, as well as other elements of capitalism, is entirely abstracted away from its place in the broader capitalist system, and therefore appears as a subjective immediacy, which elides its position as a crucial element of objective totality.

Although abstraction can lead to the concealment of objective reality, it is necessary for art, and Lukács believes that realist authors can successfully employ it "to penetrate the laws governing objective reality, and to uncover the deeper, hidden, mediated, not immediately perceptible of relationships that go to make up society." After a great deal of intellectual effort, Lukács claims a successful realist can discover these objective relationships and give them artistic shape in the form of a character's subjective experience. Then, by employing the technique of abstraction, the author can portray the character's experience of objective reality as the same kind of subjective, immediate experience that characterise totality's influence on non-fictional individuals. The best realists, he claims, "depict the vital, but not immediately obvious forces at work in objective reality." They do so with such profundity and truth that the products of their imagination can potentially receive confirmation from subsequent historical events. The true masterpieces of realism can be appreciated as "wholes" which depict a wide-ranging and exhaustive objective reality like the one that exists in the non-fictional world. 

After advancing his formulation of a desirable literary school, a realism that depicts objective reality, Lukács turns once again to the proponents of modernism. Citing Nietzsche, who argues that "the mark of every form of literary decadence ... is that life no longer dwells in the totality," Lukács strives to debunk modernist portrayals, claiming they reflect not on objective reality, but instead proceed from subjectivity to create a "home-made model of the contemporary world." The abstraction (and immediacy) inherent in modernism portrays "essences" of capitalist domination divorced from their context, in a way that takes each essence in "isolation," rather than taking into account the objective totality that is the foundation for all of them. Lukács believes that the "social mission of literature" is to clarify the experience of the masses, and in turn show these masses that their experiences are influenced by the objective totality of capitalism, and his chief criticism of modernist schools of literature is that they fail to live up to this goal, instead proceeding inexorably towards more immediate, more subjective, more abstracted versions of fictional reality that ignore the objective reality of the capitalist system. Realism, because it creates apparently subjective experiences that demonstrate the essential social realities that provoke them, is for Lukács the only defensible or valuable literary school of the early twentieth century.

Ontology of social being

Later in life, Lukács undertook a major exposition on the ontology of social being, which has been partly published in English in three volumes. The work is a systematic treatment of dialectical philosophy in its materialist form.

Bibliography

Main article: György Lukács bibliography

History and Class Consciousness (1972). ISBN 0-262-62020-0.

The Theory of the Novel (1974). ISBN 0-262-62027-8.

Lenin: A Study in the Unity of His Thought (1998). ISBN 1-85984-174-0.

A Defense of History and Class Consciousness (2000). ISBN 1-85984-747-1.

See also

Lajos Jánossy, Lukács's adopted son

Marx's notebooks on the history of technology

Notes

^ German: 

^ UK: /ˈluːkætʃ/, US: /-kɑːtʃ/; Hungarian: 

^ German: 

References

^ Marcus & Tarr 1989, p. 2.

^ Lichtheim 1970, p. ix.

^ Georg Lukács: Neo-Kantian Aesthetics, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

^ a b c d e f g h i j Georg Lukács, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ European writers, Volume 1, Scribner, 1983, p. 1258.

^ a b c d György Lukács – Britannica.com

^ Benét's Reader's Encyclopedia, Third Edition (1987) p. 588.

^ Leszek Kołakowski (, 2008), Main Currents of Marxism, Vol. 3: The Breakdown, W. W. Norton & Company, Ch VII: "György Lukács: Reason in the Service of Dogma", W.W. Norton & Co.

^ Lunching under the Goya. Jewish Collectors in Budapest at the Beginning of the Twentieth Century, Konstantin Akinsha, Quest. Issues in Contemporary Jewish History

^ Júlia Bendl, "Lukács György élete a századfordulótól 1918-ig" Archived 13 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine, 1994 (Hungarian)

^ L. Ferenc Lendvai, A fiatal Lukács: utja Marxhoz, 1902–1918, Argumentum, 2008, p. 46; István Hermann, Georg Lukács: sein Leben und Wirken, Böhlau, 1986, p. 44.

^ Lukács 1989, pp. ix–x: "On the other hand, the contradictions in my social and political views brought me intellectually into contact with Syndicalism and above all with the philosophy of George Sorel. ... My interest in Sorel was aroused by Ervin Szabó" sfn error: no target: CITEREFLukács1989 (help)

^ a b c d Kołakowski, Leszek (2005). Main Currents of Marxism. London: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 991. ISBN 978-0-393-32943-8.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ Benét's Reader's Encyclopedia Third Edition (1987) p. 588.

^ Kołakowski, Leszek (2005). Main Currents of Marxism. London: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 993. ISBN 978-0-393-32943-8.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ Kołakowski, Leszek (2005). Main Currents of Marxism. London: W. W. Norton & Company. pp. 993–4. ISBN 978-0-393-32943-8.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ a b The Conversion of Georg Lukács

^ The hinterland of the white terror. Wien, 1920. Online: https://www.marxists.org/magyar/archive/lukacs/fth.htm

^ Népszava, 1919.04.15. Online: https://adtplus.arcanum.hu/hu/view/Nepszava_1919_04/?pg=0&layout=s

^ Georg Lukács. Revolutionäres Denken. Eine Einführung in Leben und Werk (hg. v. Frank Benseler), Darmstadt-Neuwied, 1984, p. 64.

^ Lengyel András: A "tizedeltető" Lukács. Egy politikai folklór-szüzsé történeti hátteréhez. In Forrás, 2017-01. Online: http://www.forrasfolyoirat.hu/1701/lengyel.pdf p. 75.

^ Váry Albert: A vörös uralom áldozatai Magyarországon (The victims of the Reds in Hungary. Online: http://mtdaportal.extra.hu/books/vary_albert_a_voros_uralom_aldozatai.pdf

^ Congdon, Lee (2014). Exile and Social Thought: Hungarian Intellectuals in Germany and Austria, 1919–1933. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. pp. 45–46. ISBN 978-1-4008-5290-1.

^ Kołakowski, Leszek (1978). Main Currents of Marxism, Vol. 3: - The breakdown. Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 306. ISBN 0-19-824570-X.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ Kołakowski, Leszek (2005). Main Currents of Marxism. London: W. W. Norton & Company. pp. 994–5. ISBN 978-0-393-32943-8.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ Kołakowski, Leszek (2005). Main Currents of Marxism. London: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 995. ISBN 978-0-393-32943-8.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ Kołakowski, Leszek (2005). Main Currents of Marxism. London: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 996. ISBN 978-0-393-32943-8.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ Tamás Aczél, Tibor Méray (1960), The revolt of the mind: a case history of intellectual resistance behind the Iron Curtain.

^ a b Kołakowski, Leszek (2005). Main Currents of Marxism. London: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 997. ISBN 978-0-393-32943-8.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ Woroszylski, Wiktor (1957), Diary of a revolt: Budapest through Polish eyes (pamphlet)|format= requires |url= (help), Trans. Michael Segal, Sydney: Outlook.

^ Meszaros, Istvan (1991). "History and Class Consciousness". In Bottomore, Tom; Harris, Laurence; Kiernan, V.G.; Miliband, Ralph (eds.). The Dictionary of Marxist Thought (Second ed.). Blackwell Publishers Ltd. pp. 241–242. ISBN 0-631-16481-2.

^ Bien, Joseph (1999). Audi, Robert (ed.). The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 521. ISBN 0-521-63722-8.

^ Merleau-Ponty, Maurice (1973). Adventures of the Dialectic. Evanston, Illinois: Northwestern University Press. p. 30–59. ISBN 978-0-8101-0404-4.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ Petrovic, Gajo (1991). "Reification". In Bottomore, Tom; Harris, Laurence; Kiernan, V.G.; Miliband, Ralph (eds.). The Dictionary of Marxist Thought (Second ed.). Blackwell Publishers Ltd. p. 463. ISBN 0-631-16481-2.

^ Avineri, Shlomo (1972). The Social and Political Thought of Karl Marx. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 96. ISBN 0-521-09619-7.

^ a b Fetscher, Iring (1991). "Class Consciousness". In Bottomore, Tom; Harris, Laurence; Kiernan, V.G.; Miliband, Ralph (eds.). The Dictionary of Marxist Thought (Second ed.). Blackwell Publishers Ltd. p. 89. ISBN 0-631-16481-2.

^ Fetscher, Iring (1991). "Class Consciousness". In Bottomore, Tom; Harris, Laurence; Kiernan, V.G.; Miliband, Ralph (eds.). The Dictionary of Marxist Thought (Second ed.). Blackwell Publishers Ltd. pp. 89–90. ISBN 0-631-16481-2.

^ Wright, Erik Olin; Levine, Andrew; Sober, Elliott (1992). Reconstructing Marxism: Essays on Explanation and the Theory of History. London: Verso. pp. 103–4. ISBN 0-86091-554-9.

^ a b c d Petrovic, Gajo (1991). "Reification". In Bottomore, Tom; Harris, Laurence; Kiernan, V.G.; Miliband, Ralph (eds.). The Dictionary of Marxist Thought (Second ed.). Blackwell Publishers Ltd. p. 464. ISBN 0-631-16481-2.

^ Feenberg, Andrew (1981). Lukacs, Marx and the Sources of Critical Theory. Totowa, New Jersey: Rowman and Littlefield. p. 61. ISBN 0-8476-6272-1.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ a b c d e Kołakowski, Leszek (1978). Main Currents of Marxism. London: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 275. ISBN 0-19-824570-X.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ Kołakowski, Leszek (1978). Main Currents of Marxism. London: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 276. ISBN 0-19-824570-X.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ G. Lukacs, The Theory of the Novel, London: Merlin Press, 1963, p. 70.

^ Young, Joyce. A Book Without Meaning: Why You Aren't Happy With the Ending of Infinite Jest. May 2009, p. 4.

^ Gutov D., Learn, learn and learn. In: Make Everything New – A Project on Communism. Edited by Grant Watson, Gerrie van Noord & Gavin Everall. Published by Book Works and Project Arts Centre, Dublin, 2006 PP. 24–37.

^ Evgeni V. Pavlov, Perepiska (Letters), Mikhail Lifschitz and György Lukács. Moscow: Grundrisse, 2011.

^ "Realism in the Balance" (German: Es geht um den Realismus)

Sources

Woroszylski, Wiktor, 1957. Diary of a revolt: Budapest through Polish eyes. Trans. Michael Segal. . Pamphlet.

Aczel, Tamas, and Meray, Tibor, 1975. Revolt of the Mind: a case history of intellectual resistance behind the iron curtain. Greenwood Press Reprint.

Granville, Johanna. "Imre Nagy aka 'Volodya' – A Dent in the Martyr's Halo?", "Cold War International History Project Bulletin", no. 5 (Woodrow Wilson Center for International Scholars, Washington, DC), Spring, 1995, pp. 28, and 34–37.

Granville, Johanna, "The First Domino: International Decision Making During the Hungarian Crisis of 1956", Texas A & M University Press, 2004. ISBN 1-58544-298-4

Kadvany, John, 2001. Imre Lakatos and the Guises of Reason. Duke University Press. ISBN 0-8223-2659-0.

KGB Chief Kryuchkov to CC CPSU, 16 June 1989 (trans. Johanna Granville). Cold War International History Project Bulletin 5 (1995): 36 .

Arato, Andrew; Breines, Paul (1979). The Young Lukács and the Origins of Western Marxism. New York: The Seabury Press. ISBN 0-8164-9359-6.

Baldacchino, John, 1996. Post-Marxist Marxism: Questioning the Answer: Difference and Realism after Lukacs and Adorno. Brookfield, VT: Avebury.

Corredor, Eva L., 1987. György Lukács and the Literary Pretext. New York: P. Lang.

Feenberg, Andrew (1981). Lukacs, Marx and the Sources of Critical Theory. Totowa, New Jersey: Rowman and Littlefield. ISBN 0-8476-6272-1.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Heller, Agnes, 1983. Lukacs Revalued. Blackwell.

Kettler, David, 1970. "Marxism and Culture: Lukács in the Hungarian Revolutions of 1918/19," Telos, No. 10, Winter 1971, pp. 35–92

Kołakowski, Leszek (2005). Main Currents of Marxism. London: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-32943-8.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Lichtheim, George (1970). Georg Lukács. New York: Viking Press. ISBN 0670019097.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Löwy, Michael, 1979. Georg Lukács—From Romanticism to Bolshevism. Trans. Patrick Chandler. London: NLB.

Marcus, Judith T.; Tarr, Zoltán (1989). Georg Lukács: Theory, Culture, and Politics. New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers. ISBN 0887382444.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Lukács, Georg (1971). History and Class Consciousness: Studies in Marxist Dialectics. Cambridge: MIT Press. ISBN 0262620200.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Meszaros, Istvan, 1972. Lukács' Concept of Dialectic. London: The Merlin Press. ISBN 978-0850361599

Muller, Jerry Z., 2002. The Mind and the Market: Capitalism in Western Thought. Anchor Books.

Shafai, Fariborz, 1996. The Ontology of Georg Lukács : Studies in Materialist Dialectics. Brookfield, USA: Avebury. ISBN 978-1859724224

Sharma, Sunil, 1999. The Structuralist Philosophy of the Novel: a Marxist Perspective: a Critique of Georg Luckács , Lucien Goldmann, Alan Swingewood & Michel Zéraffa. Delhi: S.S. Publishers.

Snedeker, George, 2004. The Politics of Critical Theory: Language, Discourse, Society. Lanham, MD: University Press of America.

Thompson, Michael J. (ed.), 2010. Georg Lukács Reconsidered: Essays on Politics, Philosophy, and Aesthetics. Continuum Books.

Kadarkay, Arpad, 1991. Georg Lukács: Life, Thought, and Politics. Basil Blackwell.

Lukács, György.2001 "Realism in the Balance." The Norton Anthology of Theory and Criticism. Ed: Vincent B. Leitch. New York: Norton, . 1033-1058.

Further reading

Furner, James. "Commodity Form Philosophy," in Marx on Capitalism: The Interaction-Recognition-Antinomy Thesis. (Leiden: Brill, 2018). pp. 85-128.

Gerhardt, Christina. "Georg Lukács," The International Encyclopedia of Revolution and Protest, 1500 to the Present. 8 vols. Ed. Immanuel Ness (Malden: Blackwell, 2009). 2135–2137.

Hohendahl, Peter Uwe. "The Scholar, The Intellectual, And The Essay: Weber, Lukács, Adorno, And Postwar Germany," German Quarterly 70.3 (1997): 217–231.

Hohendahl, Peter U. "Art Work And Modernity: The Legacy of Georg Lukács," New German Critique: An Interdisciplinary Journal of German Studies 42.(1987): 33–49.

Hohendahl, Peter Uwe, and Blackwell Jeanine. "Georg Lukács in the GDR: On Recent Developments in Literary Theory," New German Critique: An Interdisciplinary Journal of German Studies 12.(1977): 169–174.

Jameson, Fredric. Marxism and Form: Twentieth-century Dialectical Theories of Literature. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1972.

Stern, L. "George Lukacs: An Intellectual Portrait," Dissent, vol. 5, no. 2 (Spring 1958), pp. 162–173.

External links

 Wikiquote has quotations related to: György Lukács

Works by György Lukács at Project Gutenberg

Works by or about György Lukács at Internet Archive

Georg Lukács Archive, Marxists website

Guide to Literary Theory, Johns Hopkins University Press

Georg Lukács, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy

Petri Liukkonen. "György Lukács". Books and Writers

Bendl Júlia, "Lukács György élete a századfordulótól 1918-ig"

Lukács and Imre Lakatos

Hungarian biography

Georg Lukács Archive, Libertarian Communist Library

Múlt-kor Történelmi portál (Past-Age Historic Portal): Lukács György was born 120 years ago (in Hungarian)

Levee Blanc, "Georg Lukács: The Antinomies of Melancholy", Other Voices, Vol.1 no.1, 1998.

Michael J. Thompson, "Lukacs Revisited" New Politics, 2001, Issue 30

Realism in the Balance

Political offices

Preceded by

Zsigmond Kunfi
 People's Commissar of Education

1919
 Succeeded by

József Pogány

Preceded by

József Darvas
 Minister of Culture

1956
 Succeeded by

post abolished

v

t

e

Ministers of Education of Hungary since 1848

Revolution of 1848 
J. Eötvös

Batthyány

Horváth

Kingdom of Hungary 
J. Eötvös

Szlávy

Pauler

Trefort

Baross

Csáky

L. Eötvös

Wlassics

Berzeviczy

G. Lukács (*1865)

Tost

Apponyi

Székely

Zichy

Jankovich

Apponyi

Zichy

Transition period 
Lovászy

Juhász Nagy

Kunfi

G. Lukács (*1885)

Pogány (opposed by P. Teleki)

Garbai

Imre

Huszár

Regency 
Haller

Jó. Vass

Klebelsberg

Ernszt

Karafiáth

Hóman

P. Teleki

Hóman

Szinyei Merse

Antal

Rakovszky

Transition period 
Rajniss

Szálasi

G. Teleki

Keresztury

Communist Hungary 
Ortutay

Darvas

Erdey-Grúz

Kónya

Kállai

Benke

Ilku

Nagy

Polinszky

Pozsgay

Köpeczi

Czibere

Glatz

Republic of Hungary 
Andrásfalvy

Mádl

Fodor

Magyar

Pokorni

Pálinkás

Magyar

Hiller

Ministers of Culture 
Révai

Darvas

G. Lukács (*1885)

Orbán

Pozsgay

Hámori

Rockenbauer

Görgey

Hiller

Bozóki

Minister of Religion 
Já. Vass

Minister of Higher Education 
Erdey-Grúz

Minister of National/Human Resources 
Réthelyi

Balog

Kásler

v

t

e

Aesthetics topics

Philosophers 
Abhinavagupta

Theodor W. Adorno

Leon Battista Alberti

Thomas Aquinas

Hans Urs von Balthasar

Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten

Clive Bell

Bernard Bosanquet

Edward Bullough

R. G. Collingwood

Ananda Coomaraswamy

Arthur Danto

John Dewey

Denis Diderot

Hubert Dreyfus

Curt John Ducasse

Thierry de Duve

Roger Fry

Nelson Goodman

Clement Greenberg

Georg Hegel

Martin Heidegger

David Hume

Immanuel Kant

Paul Klee

Susanne Langer

Theodor Lipps

György Lukács

Jean-François Lyotard

Joseph Margolis

Jacques Maritain

Thomas Munro

Friedrich Nietzsche

José Ortega y Gasset

Dewitt H. Parker

Stephen Pepper

David Prall

Jacques Rancière

Ayn Rand

Louis Lavelle

George Lansing Raymond

I. A. Richards

George Santayana

Friedrich Schiller

Arthur Schopenhauer

Roger Scruton

Irving Singer

Rabindranath Tagore

Giorgio Vasari

Morris Weitz

Johann Joachim Winckelmann

Richard Wollheim

more...

Theories 
Classicism

Evolutionary aesthetics

Historicism

Modernism

New Classical

Postmodernism

Psychoanalytic theory

Romanticism

Symbolism

more...

Concepts 
Aesthetic emotions

Aesthetic interpretation

Art manifesto

Avant-garde

Axiology

Beauty

Boredom

Camp

Comedy

Creativity

Cuteness

Disgust

Ecstasy

Elegance

Entertainment

Eroticism

Fun

Gaze

Harmony

Judgement

Kama

Kitsch

Life imitating art

Magnificence

Mimesis

Perception

Quality

Rasa

Recreation

Reverence

Style

Sthayibhava

Sublime

Taste

Work of art

Related 
Aesthetics of music

Applied aesthetics

Architecture

Art

Arts criticism

Feminist aesthetics

Gastronomy

History of painting

Humour

Japanese aesthetics

Literary merit

Mathematical beauty

Mathematics and architecture

Mathematics and art

Medieval aesthetics

Music theory

Neuroesthetics

Painting

Patterns in nature

Philosophy of design

Philosophy of film

Philosophy of music

Poetry

Sculpture

Theory of painting

Theory of art

Tragedy

Visual arts

Index

Outline

Category

 Philosophy portal

v

t

e

Positivism

Perspectives 
Antihumanism

Empiricism

Rationalism

Scientism

Declinations 
Legal positivism

Logical positivism / analytic philosophy

Positivist school

Postpositivism

Sociological positivism

Machian positivism (empirio-criticism)

Rankean historical positivism

Polish positivism

Russian Machism

Principal concepts 
Consilience

Demarcation

Evidence

Induction

Justification

Pseudoscience

Critique of metaphysics

Unity of science

Verificationism

Antitheses 
Antipositivism

Confirmation holism

Critical theory

Falsifiability

Geisteswissenschaft

Hermeneutics

Historicism

Historism

Human science

Humanities

Methodological dualism

Problem of induction

Reflectivism

Related paradigm shifts

in the history of science 
Non-Euclidean geometry (1830s)

Uncertainty principle (1927)

Related topics 
Behavioralism
Post-behavioralism

Critical rationalism

Criticism of science

Epistemology
anarchism

idealism

nihilism

pluralism

realism

Holism

Instrumentalism

Modernism

Naturalism in literature

Nomothetic–idiographic distinction

Objectivity in science

Operationalism

Phenomenalism

Philosophy of science
Deductive-nomological model

Ramsey sentence

Sense-data theory

Qualitative research

Relationship between religion and science

Sociology

Social science
Philosophy

Structural functionalism

Structuralism

Structuration theory

Positivist-related debate

Method 
Methodenstreit (1890s)

Werturteilsstreit (1909–1959)

Positivismusstreit (1960s)

Fourth Great Debate in international relations (1980s)

Science wars (1990s)

Contributions 
The Course in Positive Philosophy (1830)

A General View of Positivism (1848)

Critical History of Philosophy (1869)

Idealism and Positivism (1879–1884)

The Analysis of Sensations (1886)

The Logic of Modern Physics (1927)

Language, Truth, and Logic (1936)

The Two Cultures (1959)

The Universe in a Nutshell (2001)

Proponents 
Richard Avenarius

A. J. Ayer

Alexander Bogdanov

Auguste Comte

Eugen Dühring

Émile Durkheim

Ernst Laas

Ernst Mach

Berlin Circle

Vienna Circle

Criticism 
Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909)

History and Class Consciousness (1923)

The Logic of Scientific Discovery (1934)

The Poverty of Historicism (1936)

World Hypotheses (1942)

Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951)

Truth and Method (1960)

The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962)

Conjectures and Refutations (1963)

One-Dimensional Man (1964)

Knowledge and Human Interests (1968)

The Poverty of Theory (1978)

The Scientific Image (1980)

The Rhetoric of Economics (1986)

Critics 
Theodor W. Adorno

Gaston Bachelard

Mario Bunge

Wilhelm Dilthey

Paul Feyerabend

Hans-Georg Gadamer

Thomas Kuhn

György Lukács

Karl Popper

Willard Van Orman Quine

Max Weber

Concepts in contention 
Knowledge

Objectivity

Phronesis

Truth

Verstehen

Category

Authority control 
BIBSYS: 90051156

BNE: XX986561

BNF: cb11913616t (data)

CANTIC: a10356496

CiNii: DA00422431

GND: 11857518X

ISNI: 0000 0003 5457 1573

LCCN: n79018637

LNB: 000034759

NDL: 00448187

NKC: jn19990210391

NLA: 36177805

NLG: 63832

NLI: 001787363

NLK: KAC199617179

NLP: A11805936

NSK: 000002156

NTA: 068386834

RERO: 02-A006405308

ICCU: IT\\ICCU\\CFIV\\006929

SELIBR: 194170

SNAC: w6np2x0j

SUDOC: 026997797

Trove: 1224681

VIAF: 46764285

 WorldCat Identities: lccn-n79018637
