"Hua Tuo

華佗

A Qing dynasty illustration of Hua Tuo

Born c. 140

Bozhou, Anhui

Died 208 (aged 68)

Other names Yuanhua (元化)

Occupation Physician

This is a Chinese name; the family name is Hua.

Hua Tuo

Traditional Chinese 華佗

Simplified Chinese 华佗

Transcriptions

Standard Mandarin

Hanyu Pinyin Huà Tuó

Yuanhua

Chinese 元化

Transcriptions

Standard Mandarin

Hanyu Pinyin Yuánhuà

Hua Tuo (c. 140–208), courtesy name Yuanhua, was a Chinese physician who lived during the late Eastern Han dynasty. The historical texts Records of the Three Kingdoms and Book of the Later Han record Hua Tuo as the first person in China to use anaesthesia during surgery. He used a general anaesthetic combining wine with a herbal concoction called mafeisan (麻沸散; literally "cannabis boil powder"). Besides being respected for his expertise in surgery and anaesthesia, Hua Tuo was famous for his abilities in acupuncture, moxibustion, herbal medicine and medical Daoyin exercises. He developed the Wuqinxi (五禽戲; literally "Exercise of the Five Animals") from studying movements of the tiger, deer, bear, ape and crane.

Contents

1 Historical accounts

2 Fictional accounts

3 Mafeisan

4 See also

5 References

6 External links

Historical accounts

Statue of Hua Tuo at the Mengjia Longshan Temple in Taipei

Statue of Hua Tuo at Guangdong Medical College in Dongguan

Hua Tuo Memorial Hall in Bozhou, Anhui

Hua Tuo studying monkey movements

Yuanmen Maijue Neizhao Tu (元門脈訣內照圖), a chart of the internal viscera and organs. Attributed to Hua Tuo. Imprint of the Qing dynasty.

The oldest extant biographies of Hua Tuo are found in the official Chinese histories for the Eastern Han dynasty (25-220) and Three Kingdoms period (220-280) of China. The third-century historical text Records of Three Kingdoms (Sanguozhi) and fifth-century historical text Book of the Later Han (Houhanshu) record that Hua Tuo was from Qiao County (譙縣), Pei Commandery (沛郡), which is in present-day Bozhou, Anhui, and that he studied Chinese classics throughout Xu Province (covering parts of present-day Jiangsu and Shandong provinces). He refused employment offers from high-ranking officials (e.g. Chen Gui) and chose to practise medicine.

The dates of Hua Tuo's life are uncertain. Estimations range from 110 to 207, and from 190 to 265 conclude that the "best estimate" is circa 145-208. Hua Tuo was an older contemporary of the physician Zhang Zhongjing (150-219).

The name Hua Tuo combines the Chinese surname Hua (華, literally "magnificent; China") with the uncommon Chinese given name Tuo (佗 literally "hunchback" or 陀 literally "steep hill"). He was also known as Hua Fu (尃; literally "apply "), and his courtesy name was Yuanhua (元化; literally "primal transformation").

Some scholars believe that he learned Ayurveda medical techniques from early Buddhist missionaries in China. Victor H. Mair describes him as "many hundreds of years ahead of his time in medical knowledge and practice", and suggests his name Hua Tuo, which was roughly pronounced ghwa-thā in Old Chinese, could derive from the Sanskrit term agada "medicine; toxicology". Several stories in Hua Tuo's biography "have a suspiciously Ayurvedic character to them" and he was active "in the areas where the first Buddhist communities were established in China".

Hua Tuo's biography in the Sanguozhi describes him as resembling a Daoist xian (仙; "immortal") and details his medical techniques.

 had mastered the technique for nourishing one's nature. Although his contemporaries thought that he must have been a hundred years old, he still looked hale and hardy.  was also highly skilled in prescribing medicines. In curing illnesses, the decoctions that he prepared required only a few ingredients. His mind was so adept at dividing up and compounding according to the right proportions that he did not have to weigh the different components of his medicines with a balance. Once the decoction was boiled thoroughly it could be drunk.  would tell the patient how to take the medicine and then would go away, after which the patient's condition would promptly improve.

If  employed moxibustion, he would only burn punk in one or two places and in each place he only made seven or eight separate cauterisations, to which the disease would rapidly respond during the course of its elimination. If he employed acupuncture, it was also only in one or two places. As he instated the needle, he would instruct the patient, "I am going to guide the point to such-and-such a spot. When you feel it reach there, tell me." As soon as the patient told him that the point had already reached the designated spot, he would withdraw the needle and the sickness would likewise be virtually alleviated.

If a sickness were concentrated internally where the effect of acupuncture needles and medicines could not reach it,  would recognise that it was necessary to operate. In such cases, he would have his patients drink a solution of morphean powder whereupon they would immediately become intoxicated as though dead and completely insensate. Then he could make an incision and remove the diseased tissues. If the disease were in the intestines, he would sever them and wash them out, after which he would stitch the abdomen together and rub on an ointment. After a period of about four or five days, there would be no more pain. The patient would gradually regain full consciousness and within a month he would return to normal.

Hua Tuo's biography in the Houhanshu explains this mafeisan "numbing boiling powder" decoction was dissolved in jiu (酒; literally "alcoholic beverage; wine"). His prescription for mafeisan anaesthetic liquor was lost or destroyed, along with all of his writings. The Book of Sui lists five medical books attributed to Hua Tuo and his disciples, but none are extant.

The subsequent portion of Hua Tuo's biography in the Sanguozhi lists 16 medical cases: ten internal medicine, three surgical, two gynaecological, and one paediatric case. Hua Tuo's treatment of diseases was centred on internal medicine, but also included surgery, gynaecology and paediatrics. He removed parasites, performed abortions and treated ulcers, sores and analgesia. For example:

The governor of , Chen Deng, had an illness which caused him to be distressed by a feeling of stuffiness in his chest. He also had a red face and no desire for food.  took his pulse and said, "Your honour, there are several pints of parasitic bugs in your stomach and you are on the verge of developing an ulcer. This was caused by eating raw fish." Whereupon he prepared two pints of a decoction for the governor,  had him drink one pint first and then after a little while had him finish the remainder. In the space of time that it takes to eat a meal, the governor vomited up three pints or so of parasites. They had red heads and were all wriggling; half of their bodies looked like raw fish slices. The discomfort that he had experienced was immediately relieved. "This sickness will erupt after three years. If you are attended by a good doctor, he will be able to save you." The sickness did indeed erupt after the specified period. At the time,  was not in the area and the governor died as  had said he would if he did not have a good doctor.

Cao Cao (155-220), a warlord who rose to power towards the end of the Han dynasty and laid the foundation for the Cao Wei state in the Three Kingdoms period, is probably Hua Tuo's best known patient. He suffered from chronic headaches, which were possibly caused by a brain tumour.

 heard about  and summoned him to court where he henceforth was often in attendance.  suffered from blustery headaches. Whenever an attack came on, he would become dizzy and confused.  would employ acupuncture treatment at the diaphragmatic transport insertion point and the condition would be alleviated as soon as the procedure was carried out.

Cao Cao's condition has also been translated as "migraine headaches accompanied by mental disturbance and dizziness" and the acupuncture point on the sole as identified as Yongquan (涌泉; "bubbling fountain").
Cao Cao ordered Hua Tuo to be his personal physician – a job Hua Tuo resented.

Examples of 's superlative skills are in general of this sort. However, since he was originally a scholar, he often regretted that he was looked upon as a physician by profession. Later, when  took personal control of the affairs of state, his sickness intensified and he had  attend him exclusively. "It will be difficult to heal you in the near term but if we maintain a programme of treatment over a longer period, it will be possible to extend your life-span."

In order to avoid treating Cao Cao, Hua Tuo repeatedly made excuses that his wife was ill, but Cao Cao discovered the deception and ordered Hua Tuo's execution. Xun Yu, one of Cao Cao's advisers, pleaded for mercy on behalf of the physician.

 had been far away from home for a long time and wished to return, so he said, "I just received a letter from home and would like to go back temporarily." After he reached home, excusing himself on the grounds of his wife's illness, he requested several extension of his leave and did not come back.  repeatedly wrote letters to  calling him back, and he issued imperial orders to the commandery and district authorities to send  back. Proud of his ability and finding it distasteful to wait upon others for a living,  continued to procrastinate in setting off on the journey.  became very angry and dispatched men to go and investigate. If 's wife were really sick,  would present him with forty bushels of lentils and be lenient in setting a date when his leave would expire. But if  were prevaricating, then he would be apprehended and escorted back. Consequently,  was handed over to the prison at Hsü where after interrogation, he confessed his guilt. Interceding on behalf of ,  said, "'s techniques are truly effective and people's lives are dependent upon them. It is fitting that you be clement towards him." "Don't worry," said . "Do you think there aren't any other rats like him under heaven?"

Hua Tuo wrote down his medical techniques while awaiting execution, but destroyed his Qing Nang Shu (青囊書; literally "green bag book", which became a Classical Chinese term for "medical practices text").

Whereupon the investigation against  was concluded with the announcement of the death penalty. When  was about to be executed he brought out a scroll with writing on it and handed it over to the jailer, saying, "This can preserve people's lives." Fearful of the law, the prison subaltern would not accept it, nor did  force it upon him. Instead, he asked for a fire in which he burned the scroll.

This loss to traditional Chinese medicine was irreplaceable. Ilza Veith notes that, "Unfortunately, Hua T'o's works were destroyed; his surgical practices fell into disuse, with the exception of his method of castration, which continued to be practised. Due to the religious stigma attached to the practice of surgery, the social position accorded to the surgeon became increasingly lower and thus made a revival of Chinese surgery impossible." A Liezi legend claims that the renowned physician Bian Que (c. 500 BCE) used anaesthesia to perform a double heart transplantation, but the fourth-century text was compiled after Hua Tuo used mafeisan.
Cao Cao later regretted executing Hua Tuo when his son Cao Chong (196–208), a child prodigy who may have independently discovered and used Archimedes' principle, died from illness.

After 's death, 's blustery headaches did not go away. " could have cured me," said , "but the scoundrel prolonged my illness, wishing thereby to enhance his own position. Thus, even if I hadn't put the knave to death, he never would have eradicated the source of my sickness." Later on, when his beloved son  was critically ill,  said with a sigh, "I regret having put  to death and causing my son to die in vain."

The Sanguozhi does not specify Hua Tuo's exact date of death, but since Cao Chong died in 208, Hua Tuo could not have lived past that year.
Hua Tuo's biography ends with accounts of his disciples Wu Pu (吳普) and Fan A (樊阿).

 of  and  of  both studied with . Using 's methods of treatment, many people were completely cured by . "The human body needs exertion."  told , "but it shouldn't be pushed to the limit. Movement of the limbs facilitates the absorption of nutrients in food and enable the blood in the arteries to flow freely, preventing sickness from occurring. It's like a door-pivot that never decays from bugs or worms because of the constant opening and closing. That's why, when the ancient transcendent practiced duction, they strode like a bear and turned their head backward like an owl. They elongated their waist and limbs and moved all of their joints, seeking to stave off old age. I have a technique called 'the exercise of the five animals'. The first is the tiger, the second is the deer, the third is the bear, the fourth is the ape, the fifth is the bird. They may also be used to get rid of illness and are beneficial for the legs and feet because they are a type of duction. If there is discomfort somewhere in your body, get up and do one of my animal exercises until you're soaking with sweat, then sprinkle powder on yourself. Your body will feel relaxed and you'll have a good appetite."

Fan A was skilled at acupuncture and inserted the needles to extraordinary depths. Victor H. Mair notes this unusual name may indicate Fan A was a foreigner, and this area was around present-day Tongshan County, Jiangsu, the "location of the first known Buddhist community in China".

 requested from  the recipe for an orally ingested medicine that would be beneficial to one's health, and  instructed him how to make a powder of varish tree leaves and herbe de flacq. The proportions are fourteen ounces of shredded herbe de flacq for each pint of shredded varnish tree leaves.  said that if one takes a long course of this medicine, it will get rid of the three worms , benefit the five viscera, make the body feel nimble, and prevent you hair from turning white.

These herbs are qiye (漆叶; Toxicodendron vernicifluum leaves) and qingdian (青黏; Sigesbeckia orientalis).
The Song dynasty Confucianist scholar Ye Mengde (1077–1148) criticised the Sanguozhi and Houhanshu biographies of Hua Tuo as being mythological. His "Physicians Cannot Raise the Dead" essay repeated the descriptions of Hua Tuo using anaesthesia to perform internal surgery, and reasoned,

There is absolutely no principle whereby to account for this. That which makes a human being a human being is his physical form, and that which enlivens the physical form is the vital breath. I have no way of knowing whether 's medicine could make a person intoxicated to the point of unconsciousness so that he could endure being cut open and could fully recuperate, causing the damaged portions to grow back together again. However, once the abdomen, back, intestines, or stomach have been cut open and dissected, how can they again be infused with vital breath? Being in such a condition, how could they be brought back to life again? If  could do this, then whoever was subjected to the punishment of dismemberment could be brought back to life again and there would no longer be any reason for carrying out royal punishments .

In later times, a set of 34 paravertebral acupuncture points was named "Hua Tuo Jiaji" (華佗夹脊) in his honour. Hua Tuo is considered a shenyi (神醫, "divine physician") and is worshipped as a medicinal god or immortal in Daoist temples. "Hua Tuo zaishi" (華佗再世; "Hua Tuo reincarnated") is also a term of respect for a highly-skilled physician.

Fictional accounts

Woodblock by Utagawa Kuniyoshi depicting Hua Tuo operating on Guan Yu

In the 14th-century historical novel Romance of the Three Kingdoms, Hua Tuo heals the general Guan Yu, who is hit by a poisoned arrow in the arm during the Battle of Fancheng in 219. Hua Tuo offers to anaesthetise Guan Yu, but he simply laughs and says that he is not afraid of pain. Hua Tuo uses a knife to cut the flesh from Guan Yu's arm and scrape the poison from the bone, and the sounds strike fear into all those who heard them. During this excruciating treatment, Guan Yu continues to play a game of weiqi with Ma Liang without flinching from pain. When Ma Liang asks him later, Guan Yu says that he feigned being unhurt to keep the morale of his troops high. After Hua Tuo's successful operation, Guan Yu allegedly rewards him with a sumptuous banquet, and offers a gift of 100 ounces of gold, but Hua Tuo refuses, saying that a physician's duty is to heal patients and not to make profit. Although Hua Tuo historically died in 208, a decade before Guan Yu fought at the Battle of Fancheng, this story of him performing surgery on Guan Yu has become a popular artistic theme.

Hua Tuo is later summoned by Cao Cao to cure a chronic excruciating pain in his head, which turns out to be due to a brain tumour. Hua Tuo tells Cao Cao that in order to remove the tumor, it would be necessary to open up the brain by cutting open the head, getting the tumor out, and sewing it back, with Cao Cao completely anesthesized in the process. However, Cao Cao suspects that Hua Tuo is planning to murder him so he has Hua Tuo arrested and imprisoned. (Cao Cao's suspicions are in part due to a previous attempt by Ji Ping, an imperial physician, to force him to consume poisoned medicine.)

In Romance of the Three Kingdoms, Hua Tuo passes his Qing Nang Shu to a prison guard so that his medical legacy will live on. He dies in prison later. The prison guard's wife burnt the book for fear of being implicated, but the guard manages to salvage some pages, which are about how to emasculate hen and ducks; the other pages are lost forever.

Mafeisan

Hua Tuo's innovative anaesthetic mafeisan (literally "cannabis boiling powder", considered to be the first anesthetic in the world), which was supposedly used on Hua Tuo's patients during surgery, is a long-standing mystery. The Records of the Three Kingdoms and the Book of the Later Han both credit him as creating this anesthetic during the Eastern Han Dynasty. However, no written record or ingredients of the original have been found, although estimations have been made by Chinese medical practitioners in later periods of time. There is controversy over the historical existence of mafeisan in Chinese literature.

The name mafeisan combines ma (麻; "cannabis; hemp; numbed"), fei (沸; "boiling; bubbling") and san (散; "break up; scatter; medicine in powder form"). Ma can mean "cannabis; hemp" and "numbed; tingling" (e.g. mazui 麻醉 "anesthetic; narcotic"), which is semantically "derived from the properties of the fruits and leaves, which were used as infusions for medicinal purposes".

Modern Standard Chinese mafei is reconstructed as Old Chinese *mrâipəts, Late Han Chinese maipus (during Hua Tuo's life), and Middle Chinese mapjwəi.

Many sinologists and scholars of traditional Chinese medicine have guessed at the anaesthetic components of mafei powder. Frederick P. Smith contends that Hua Tuo, "the Machaon of Chinese historical romance", used yabulu (押不蘆; "Mandragora officinarum") rather than huoma (火麻; "cannabis") and mantoulo (曼佗羅; "Datura stramonium", nota bene, Hua's given name "Tuo") "infused in wine, and drunk as a stupefying medicine".

Herbert Giles (1897:323) translates mafeisan as "hashish"; and his son Lionel Giles identifies "hemp-bubble-powder" as "something akin to hashish or bhang". Ilza Veith quotes the sinologist Erich Hauer's "opinion that ma-fei (麻沸) means opium". Victor H. Mair notes that mafei "appears to be a transcription of some Indo-European word related to "morphine. Although Friedrich Sertürner first isolated morphine from opium in 1804, Mair suggests, "It is conceivable that some such name as morphine was already in use before as a designation for the anaesthetic properties of this opium derivative or some other naturally occurring substance." Wang Zhenguo and Chen Ping find consensus among "scientists of later generations" that mafei contained yangjinhua (洋金花; "Datura stramonium") and wutou (烏頭; "rhizome of Aconitum, Chinese monkshood") or caowu (草烏; "Aconitum kusnezofflin; Kusnezoff monkshood").

Lu Gwei-Djen and Joseph Needham suggest Hua Tuo may have discovered surgical analgesia by acupuncture, "quite apart from the stupefying potions for which he became so famous – if so he kept it to himself and his immediate disciples so that the secret did not survive".

See also

Lists of people of the Three Kingdoms

References

^ a b c de Crespigny (2007), p. 332.

^ DeWoskin (1983), pp. 140-153.

^ Mair (1994), pp. 688-696.

^ Li (1974), p. 296.

^ a b Mair (1994), p. 227.

^ a b c Veith (1966), p. 3.

^ Lu & Needham (2002), p. 117.

^ Chen (1977), pp. 36-40.

^ Chen (2007), p. 293.

^ Salguero (2009).

^ Mair (1994), pp. 688-689.

^ Fan (2004), p. 316.

^ Mair (1994), pp. 689-694.

^ Fan (2004), p. 314.

^ Mair (1994), pp. 692-693.

^ Mair (1994), p. 693.

^ a b Lu & Needham (2002), p. 118.

^ a b c Mair (1994), p. 694.

^ Giles (1912), pp. 81-83.

^ a b Mair (1994), p. 695.

^ Mair (1994), pp. 695-696.

^ Mair (1994), p. 696.

^ Mair (1994), p. 697.

^ Cooper, Raymond; Che, Chun-Tao; Mok, Daniel Kam-Wah; Tsang, Charmaine Wing-Yee (2017). Chinese and Botanical Medicines: Traditional Uses and Modern Scientific Approaches. CRC Press. p. 129. ISBN 978-1-351-64525-6.

^ Ross, Stewart (2019). The First of Everything: A History of Human Invention, Innovation and Discovery. Michael O'Mara Books. p. 42. ISBN 978-1-78929-063-9.

^ Zhao, Peishan (1 January 2018). "Was There Mafeisan, An Anesthetic in Ancient China?". Journal of Anesthesia History. 4 (1): 56. doi:10.1016/j.janh.2017.11.040. ISSN 2352-4529.

^ Li (1974), p. 297.

^ Schuessler (2007), pp. 233, 373.

^ Smith (1871), p. 61.

^ Giles (1897), p. 323.

^ Giles (1948), p. 72.

^ Mair (1994), p. 689.

^ Wang & Chen (1999), p. 91.

Chen, Jinhua (2007). Philosopher, Practitioner, Politician: The Many Lives of Fazang (643-712). Brill.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Chen, Shou (3rd century). Records of the Three Kingdoms (in Chinese). Volume 29. Check date values in: |year= (help)CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Chen, Yinque (1977). Biographies of Cao Chong and Hua Tuo in the Sanguozhi and their relationship with Buddhist legends (in Chinese). Jiushi chuban.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

de Crespigny, Rafe (2007). A biographical dictionary of Later Han to the Three Kingdoms (23–220 AD). Leiden: Brill. ISBN 978-90-04-15605-0.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

DeWoskin, Kenneth J. (1983). Doctors, Diviners and Magicians of Ancient China: Biographies of Fang-Shih. Columbia University Press.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Fan, Ka Wai (2004). "On Hua Tuo's Position in the History of Chinese Medicine". The American Journal of Chinese Medicine. 32 (2): 313–320.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Fan, Ye (5th century). Book of the Later Han (in Chinese). Volume 82. Check date values in: |year= (help)CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Giles, Herbert A. (1897). A Chinese Biographical Dictionary. Kelly & Walsh.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Giles, Lionel (1912). Taoist Teachings from the Book of Lieh-Tzŭ. Wisdom of the East.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Giles, Lionel (1948). A Gallery of Chinese Immortals. J. Murray.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Li, Hui-Lin (1974). "The Origin and Use of Cannabis in Eastern Asia: Linguistic-Cultural Implications". Economic Botany. 28 (3): 293–301. doi:10.1007/bf02861426.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Lu, Gwei-Djen; Needham, Joseph (2002). Celestial Lancets: A History and Rationale of Acupuncture and Moxa. Routledge.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Mair, Victor H. (1994). "The Biography of Hua-t'o from the "History of the Three Kingdoms. In Victor H. Mair (ed.). The Columbia Anthology of Traditional Chinese Literature. Columbia University Press. pp. 688–696.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Salguero, C. Pierce (2009). "The Buddhist medicine king in literary context: reconsidering an early medieval example of Indian influence on Chinese medicine and surgery". History of Religions. 48 (3): 183–210. doi:10.1086/598230.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Schuessler, Axel (2007). An Etymological Dictionary of Old Chinese. University of Hawaii Press.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Smith, Frederick P (1871). Contributions towards the Materia Medica and Natural History of China. Trubner & Co.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Veith, Ilza (1966). Huang Ti Nei Ching Su Wen; The Yellow Emperor's Classic of Internal Medicine. University of California Press.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Wang, Zhenguo; Chen, Ping (1999). History and Development of Traditional Chinese Medicine. IOS Press.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

External links

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hua Tuo.

Hua Tuo, Subhuti Dharmananda

Hua Tuo: A miraculous healer in ancient China, Association for Asian Research

A Brief Biography of Hua Tuo, John Chen

v

t

e

Cannabis in China

Regions 
Cannabis in Hong Kong

Cannabis in Macau

History 
Gushi culture

Hua Tuo

Magu (deity)

Related 
Cannabis and Taoism

v

t

e

Han dynasty topics

History 
Chu–Han Contention (Feast at Swan Goose Gate)

Lü Clan Disturbance

Rebellion of the Seven States

Han–Xiongnu War

Han conquest of Gojoseon

Southward expansion (Han–Minyue War

Han conquest of Nanyue

Han conquest of Dian

First Chinese domination of Vietnam

Trung sisters' rebellion

Second Chinese domination of Vietnam)

Xin dynasty

Red Eyebrows and Lulin

Chengjia

Goguryeo–Han War

Disasters of the Partisan Prohibitions

Way of the Five Pecks of Rice

Yellow Turban Rebellion

End of the Han dynasty

Society and culture 
Ban Gu

Sima Qian

Records of the Grand Historian

Book of Han

Book of the Later Han

Records of the Three Kingdoms

Flying Horse of Gansu

Huainanzi

Eight Immortals of Huainan

Mawangdui Silk Texts

Luxuriant Dew of the Spring and Autumn Annals

Yiwu Zhi

Old Texts

Han poetry
Fu

Government and military 
Ban Chao

Lu Bode

Ma Yuan

Emperor
List

Family tree

Three Lords and Nine Ministers
Nine Ministers

Three Ducal Ministers

Kings

Four Commanderies

Protectorate of the Western Regions (Chief Official)

List of government titles

Economy 
Ancient Chinese coinage

Silk Road

Sino-Roman relations

Science and technology 
Cai Lun

Ding Huan

Du Shi

Hua Tuo

Wang Chong

Zhang Heng

Zhang Zhongjing

Texts 
Balanced Discourse

Book of Origins

Book on Numbers and Computation

Essential Prescriptions from the Golden Cabinet

The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art

Huangdi Neijing

Treatise on Cold Injury and Miscellaneous Disorders

Zhoubi Suanjing

v

t

e

History of medicine in China

Physicians 
Bian Que (401–310 BCE)

Hua Tuo (140–208)

Zhang Zhongjing (150—219)

Huangfu Mi (215–282)

Dong Feng (c. 3rd century)

Ge Hong (283–343)

Sun Simiao (581–682)

Wang Weiyi (987-1067)

Tang Shenwei (c.1056-1093)

Song Ci (1186–1249)

Wei Yilin (1277–1347)

Tan Yunxian (1461–1554)

Li Shizhen (1518–1593)

Medical texts 
Baopuzi

Compendium of Materia Medica

Huangdi Bashiyi Nanjing

Huangdi Neijing (Lingshu Jing

Taisu)

Jingui Yaolüe

Shanghan Lun

Shennong Ben Cao Jing

Wushi'er Bingfang

Yaoxing Lun

Yin Yang Shiyi Mai Jiujing

Zubi Shiyi Mai Jiujing

v

t

e

Notable people at the end of the Han dynasty (189–220)

Emperors 
Ling

Shao

Xian

Empresses and noble ladies 
Empress Dowager Dong

Empress He

Consort Tang

Empress Fu

Empress Cao

Regents 
He Jin

Dong Zhuo

Wang Yun

Li Jue & Guo Si

Cao Cao

Cao Pi

Warlords 
Bao Xin

Bian Zhang

Ding Yuan

Gao Gan

Gongsun Du

Gongsun Gong

Gongsun Kang

Gongsun Zan

Han Fu

Han Sui

Han Xuan

Jin Xuan

Kong Rong

Kong Zhou

Liu Bei

Liu Biao

Liu Chong

Liu Cong

Liu Du

Liu Qi

Liu Xun

Liu Yan

Liu Yao

Liu Yu

Liu Zhang

Lü Bu

Ma Chao

Ma Teng

Qiao Mao

Shi Xie

Sun Ce

Sun Jian

Sun Quan

Tao Qian

Wang Kuang

Wang Lang

Xu Gong

Yan Baihu

Yang Qiu

Yuan Tan

Yuan Shao

Yuan Shang

Yuan Shu

Yuan Xi

Yuan Yi

Zang Hong

Ze Rong

Zhang Jue

Zhang Lu

Zhang Xiu

Zhang Yan

Zhang Yang

Zhao Fan

Civil officers 
Cai Yong

Cao Song

Chang Lin

Chen Deng

Chen Gong

Chen Gui

Chen Ji

Chen Lin

Cheng Yu

Chenggong Ying

Cui Yan

Ding Yi

Fa Zheng

Gao You

Gu Hui

Gu Shao

Guan Jing

Guo Jia

Guo Tu

Guo Yuan

Han Ji

He Kui

Hua Xin

Jia Xu

Jian Yong

Ju Shou

Kuai Liang

Kuai Yue

Li Ru

Liang Mao

Liu Dai

Liu Fu

Liu Hong

Lou Gui

Lu Kang

Ma Liang

Ma Midi

Mao Jie

Mi Fang

Mi Zhu

Pang Ji

Pang Tong

Pang Xi

Pang Yu

Pei Qian

Peng Yang

Qiao Xuan

Qin Song

Shen Pei

Sheng Xian

Shi Ren

Sima Fang

Sima Lang

Sima Zhi

Su Ze

Sun Qian

Tian Feng

Wang Can

Wang Xiu

Wei Kang

Wu Zhi

Xin Pi

Xin Ping

Xing Yong

Xu Shao

Xu Shu

Xu Yi

Xu You

Xun Chen

Xun Shuang

Xun You

Xun Yu

Xun Yue

Yan Wen

Yan Xiang

Yang Biao

Yang Jun

Yang Xiu

Ying Shao

Yuan Huan

Zhang Cheng

Zhang Fan

Zhang Hong

Zhang Miao

Zhang Song

Zhang Wen

Zhang Yu

Zhang Zhao

Zhao Ang

Zhao Qi

Zhong Yao

Zhou Qun

Zhuge Liang

Zhuge Xuan

Military officers 
Bu Zhi

Cai Mao

Cao Bao

Cao Chun

Cao Hong

Cao Ren

Cao Xing

Cao Xiu

Cao Zhang

Chen Shi

Chen Wu

Cheng Pu

Chunyu Qiong

Dian Wei

Ding Feng

Dong Cheng

Dong Xi

Fan Chou

Gan Ning

Gao Shun

Gu Li

Guan Yu

Guan Ping

Guo Yuan

Han Dang

Han Hao

Han Xian

Hao Meng

He Qi

Hou Cheng

Hu Zhen

Hua Xiong

Huang Gai

Huang Quan

Huang Zhong

Huang Zu

Huangfu Song

Huo Jun

Ji Ling

Jia Kui

Jiang Qin

Jiang Xu

Li Dian

Li Su

Li Tong

Li Yan

Liao Hua

Ling Cao

Ling Tong

Liu Feng

Lu Su

Lu Xun

Lu Zhi

Lü Fan

Lü Meng

Man Chong

Meng Da

Niu Fu

Niu Jin

Pan Zhang

Pang De

Qian Zhao

Qin Yilu

Qu Yi

Ren Jun

Sima Yi

Sun Ben

Sun Fu

Sun Jiao

Sun Jing

Sun Yi

Sun Yu

Taishi Ci

Tian Kai

Wang Zhong

Wen Chou

Wen Ping

Wu Jing

Wu Yi

Xiahou Dun

Xiahou Yuan

Xu Chu

Xu Huang

Xu Rong

Xu Sheng

Yan Liang

Yan Rou

Yan Xing

Yan Yan

Yang Feng

Yin Li

Yu Jin

Yue Jin

Zang Ba

Zhang Fei

Zhang He

Zhang Ji

Zhang Liao

Zhang Ren

Zhao Lei

Zhao Yan

Zhao Yun

Zhou Ang

Zhou Tai

Zhou Xin

Zhou Yu

Zhou Yu (Renming)

Zhu Huan

Zhu Jun

Zhu Ling

Zhu Ran

Zhu Zhi

Zhuge Jin

Other notable women 
Lady Bian

Bu Lianshi

Cai Yan

Lady Gan

Guan Yinping

Huang Yueying

Lady Mi

Pang E

Two Qiaos

Lady Sun

Wang Yi

Lady Wu

Zhang Changpu

Zhang Chunhua

Lady Zhen

Xin Xianying

Other notable figures 
Bing Yuan

Cao Ang

Cao Chong

Cao Xiong

Cao Zhi

Gan Ji

Guan Lu

Hua Tuo

Huang Chengyan

Ji Ben

Jian Shuo

Jiang Gan

Liu Bao

Mi Heng

Qiuliju

Sima Hui

Sun Kuang

Tadun

Ten Attendants

Tian Chou

Zhang Zhongjing

Zuo Ci

v

t

e

Qigong

Main topics 
Qi

Chinese martial arts

Chinese philosophy

History of qigong

Qigong fever

Traditional Chinese medicine

Tai chi

TCM and philosophy 
Acupuncture

Chinese art

Dantian

Tui na

Essence (Jing 精)

Meridian (jīngluò 经络)

Spirit (Shen 神)

Yin and yang

Traditional practices 
Internal alchemy (Neidan 內丹术)

Silk reeling (Chán sī jìng 纏絲勁)

Standing meditation (Zhan zhuang 站桩)

Taoist gymnastic breathing/Guide and Pull (Tao yin 導引)

Qigong forms and styles 
Eight Pieces of Brocade (Bāduànjǐn qìgōng 段锦气功)

Five Animals (Wu Qin Xi qìgōng 五禽戲)

Muscle/Tendon Change Classic (Yijin Jing qìgōng 易筋经)

Primordial qigong (Wujigong 無極氣功)

Six Healing Sounds (Liu Zi Jue qìgōng 六字訣)

 Wisdom Healing Qigong (Zhineng qìgōng 智能气功)

Qigong masters 
Hua Tuo (141–208)

Li Shizhen (1518–1593)

Zhang Sanfeng (c. 12th century)

Spiritual movements and politics 
Falun Gong

Zhong Gong

Related topics 
Alternative medicine

Biofeedback

Energy medicine

Exercise

Meditation

Mind-body intervention

World Tai Chi and Qigong Day

Category

Authority control 
BIBSYS: 14028135

BNF: cb15107120m (data)

GND: 129406031

ISNI: 0000 0000 6324 0037

LCCN: n80137507

NLA: 36602330

NLI: 004339071

NLK: KAC2018N7144

NTA: 144861631

Trove: 1319471

VIAF: 60390084

 WorldCat Identities: lccn-n80137507
