 Part of a series on

Weather

Temperate and polar seasons

Winter

Spring

Summer

Autumn

Tropical seasons

Dry season
Harmattan

Wet season

Storms

Cloud
Cumulonimbus cloud

Arcus cloud

Downburst
Microburst

Heat burst

Derecho

Lightning
Volcanic lightning

Thunderstorm
Air-mass thunderstorm

Thundersnow

Dry thunderstorm

Mesocyclone
Supercell

Tornado
Anticyclonic tornado

Landspout

Waterspout

Dust devil

Fire whirl

Anticyclone

Cyclone

Polar low

Extratropical cyclone
European windstorm

Nor'easter

Subtropical cyclone

Tropical cyclone
Atlantic hurricane

Typhoon

Storm surge

Dust storm
Simoom

Haboob

Monsoon
Amihan

Gale

Sirocco

Firestorm

Winter storm
Ice storm

Blizzard

Ground blizzard

Snowsquall

Precipitation

Drizzle
Freezing

Graupel

Hail
Megacryometeor

Ice pellets

Diamond dust

Rain
Freezing

Cloudburst

Snow
Rain and snow mixed

Snow grains

Snow roller

Slush

Topics

Air pollution

Atmosphere

Chemistry

Convection

Physics

River

Climate

Cloud
Physics

Fog
Fog season

Cold wave

Heat wave

Jet stream

Meteorology

Severe weather
List

Extreme

Severe weather terminology
Canada

Japan

United States

Weather forecasting

Weather modification

Glossaries

Meteorology

Climate change

Tornado terms

Tropical cyclone terms

 Weather portal

v

t

e

Ice pellets are a form of precipitation consisting of small, translucent balls of ice. Ice pellets are smaller than hailstones which form in thunderstorms rather than in winter, and are different from graupel ("soft hail") which is made of frosty white rime, and from a mixture of rain and snow which is a slushy liquid or semisolid. Ice pellets often bounce when they hit the ground or other solid objects, and make a higher-pitched "tap" when striking objects like jackets, windshields, and dried leaves, compared to the dull splat of liquid raindrops. Pellets generally do not freeze into a solid mass unless mixed with freezing rain. The METAR code for ice pellets is PL (PE before November 1998).

Contents

1 Terminology

2 Formation

3 Effects

4 See also

5 References

6 External links

Terminology

Ice pellets are known as sleet in the United States, the official term used by the U.S. National Weather Service. However, the term sleet refers to a mixture of rain and snow in most Commonwealth countries, including Canada. Because of this, Environment Canada never uses the term sleet, and uses the terms "ice pellets" or "wet snow" instead.

Formation

Temperature profile for ice pellet formation.

Ice pellets form when a layer of above-freezing air is located between 1,500 and 3,000 meters (5,000 and 10,000 ft) above the ground, with sub-freezing air both above and below it. This causes the partial or complete melting of any snowflakes falling through the warm layer (the French term for sleet, neige fondue, literally means "melted snow" because of this). As they fall back into the sub-freezing layer closer to the surface, they re-freeze into ice pellets. However, if the sub-freezing layer beneath the warm layer is too small, the precipitation will not have time to re-freeze before hitting the surface, so it will become freezing rain. A temperature profile showing a warm layer above the ground is most likely to be found in advance of a warm front during the cold season, but can occasionally be found behind a passing cold front, and often with a stationary front.

An accumulation of ice pellets

Ice pellets next to a U.S. penny for scale

Effects

In most parts of the world, ice pellets only occur for brief periods and do not accumulate a significant amount. However, across the eastern United States and southeastern Canada, warm air flowing north from the Gulf of Mexico ahead of a strong synoptic-scale storm system can overrun cold, dense air at the surface for many hundreds of miles for an extended period of time. In these areas, ice pellet accumulations of 2–5 cm (0.8–2.0 in) are not unheard of. The effects of a significant accumulation of ice pellets are not unlike an accumulation of snow. One significant difference is that for the same volume of snow, an equal volume of ice pellets is significantly heavier and thus more difficult to clear away. Additionally, a volume of ice pellets takes significantly longer to melt compared to an equal volume of fresh snowfall.

See also

Freezing rain

Graupel

Hail

Sleet (disambiguation)

References

^ "Hail (glossary entry)". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's National Weather Service. Retrieved 2007-03-20.

^ "USA and International Code Change For Ice Pellets". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved 2013-09-20.

^ "Sleet (glossary entry)". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's National Weather Service. Retrieved 2007-03-20.

^ "sleet Meaning in the Cambridge English Dictionary". cambridge.org.

^ "Weather Glossary". Environment Canada. Retrieved 2015-03-30. Ice pellets: This is the term Canadians use to describe frozen rain drops which are five millimetres or less in diameter and bounce when they hit a hard surface. Americans call this sleet.

^ Chris St. Clair, Canada's Weather, p. 55, Firefly Books, 2009. ISBN 1-55407-338-3

^ Weatherquestions.com. What causes ice pellets (sleet)? Retrieved on 2007-12-08.

External links

 Media related to Ice pellets at Wikimedia Commons

Authority control 
LCCN: sh94001038

NARA: 10664656
