"

Country in Southeast Asia and Oceania

Coordinates: 5°S 120°E / 5°S 120°E / -5; 120

Republic of Indonesia

Republik Indonesia (Indonesian)

 Flag

 National emblem

Motto: Bhinneka Tunggal Ika (Old Javanese)

(English: \"Unity in Diversity\")

National ideology: Pancasila

Anthem: \"Indonesia Raya\"

(English: \"Great Indonesia\")

Capital

and largest city

Jakarta

6°10′S 106°49′E / 6.167°S 106.817°E / -6.167; 106.817

Official language

and national language Indonesian

Regional languages

Over 700 languages

Ethnic groups

Over 300 ethnic groups

Religion (2018)

86.7% Islam

10.72% Christianity

1.74% Hinduism

0.77% Buddhism

0.03% Confucianism

0.04% Folk

Demonym(s) Indonesian

Government Unitary presidential constitutional republic

• President

Joko Widodo

• Vice President

Ma'ruf Amin

• DPR Speaker

Puan Maharani

• Chief Justice

Muhammad Syarifuddin

Legislature People's Consultative Assembly (MPR)

• Upper house

Regional Representative Council (DPD)

• Lower house

People's Representative Council (DPR)

Formation

• Hindu and Buddhist kingdoms

2nd century

• Islamic sultanates

13th century

• Dutch East India Company

20 March 1602

• Dutch East Indies

1 January 1800

• Japanese occupation

9 March 1942

• Independence proclaimed

17 August 1945

• Federation recognised

27 December 1949

• Unitary republic

17 August 1950

Area

• Land

1,904,569 km2 (735,358 sq mi) (14th)

• Water (%)

4.85

Population

• 2018 estimate

267,670,543

• 2010 census

237,641,326 (4th)

• Density

138/km2 (357.4/sq mi) (88th)

GDP (PPP) 2019 estimate

• Total

$3.740 trillion (7th)

• Per capita

$14,840 (89th)

GDP (nominal) 2019 estimate

• Total

$1.200 trillion (16th)

• Per capita

$4,460 (106th)

Gini (2018) 39.0

medium

HDI (2018) 0.707

high · 111th

Currency Indonesian rupiah (Rp) (IDR)

Time zone UTC+7 to +9 (various)

Date format DD/MM/YYYY

Driving side left

Calling code +62

ISO 3166 code ID

Internet TLD .id

Indonesia (/ˌɪndəˈniːʒə/ (listen) IN-də-NEE-zhə), officially the Republic of Indonesia (Indonesian: Republik Indonesia  (listen)), is a country in Southeast Asia and Oceania, between the Indian and Pacific oceans. It consists of more than seventeen thousand islands, including Sumatra, Java, Borneo (Kalimantan), Sulawesi, and New Guinea (Papua). Indonesia is the world's largest island country and the 14th largest country by land area, at 1,904,569 square kilometres (735,358 square miles). With over 267 million people, it is the world's 4th most populous country as well as the most populous Muslim-majority country. Java, the world's most populous island, is home to more than half of the country's population.

The sovereign state is a presidential, constitutional republic with an elected legislature. It has 34 provinces, of which five have special status. The country's capital, Jakarta, is the second-most populous urban area in the world. The country shares land borders with Papua New Guinea, East Timor, and the eastern part of Malaysia. Other neighbouring countries include Singapore, Vietnam, the Philippines, Australia, Palau, and India's Andaman and Nicobar Islands. Despite its large population and densely populated regions, Indonesia has vast areas of wilderness that support one of the world's highest levels of biodiversity.

The Indonesian archipelago has been a valuable region for trade since at least the 7th century when Srivijaya and later Majapahit traded with entities from mainland China and the Indian subcontinent. Local rulers gradually absorbed foreign influences from the early centuries and Hindu and Buddhist kingdoms flourished. Sunni traders and Sufi scholars brought Islam, while Europeans introduced Christianity through colonisation. Although sometimes interrupted by the Portuguese, French and British, the Dutch were the foremost colonial power for much of their 350-year presence in the archipelago. The concept of \"Indonesia\" as a nation-state emerged in the early 20th century and the country proclaimed its independence in 1945. However, it was not until 1949 that the Dutch recognised Indonesia's sovereignty following an armed and diplomatic conflict between the two.

Indonesia consists of hundreds of distinct native ethnic and linguistic groups, with the largest one being the Javanese. A shared identity has developed with the motto \"Bhinneka Tunggal Ika\" (\"Unity in Diversity\" literally, \"many, yet one\"), defined by a national language, ethnic diversity, religious pluralism within a Muslim-majority population, and a history of colonialism and rebellion against it. The economy of Indonesia is the world's 16th largest by nominal GDP and 7th by GDP at PPP. The country is a member of several multilateral organisations, including the United Nations, World Trade Organization, International Monetary Fund, G20, and a founding member of Non-Aligned Movement, Association of Southeast Asian Nations, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, East Asia Summit, Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, and Organisation of Islamic Cooperation.

Contents

1 Etymology

2 History

2.1 Early history

2.2 Colonial era

2.3 Modern era

3 Geography

3.1 Climate

3.2 Geology

3.3 Biodiversity

3.4 Environment

4 Government and politics

4.1 Parties and elections

4.2 Administrative divisions

4.3 Foreign relations

4.4 Military

5 Economy

5.1 Transport

5.2 Energy

5.3 Science and technology

5.4 Tourism

6 Demographics

6.1 Ethnic groups and languages

6.2 Religion

6.3 Education and health

6.4 Issues

7 Culture

7.1 Art and architecture

7.2 Music, dance and clothing

7.3 Theatre and cinema

7.4 Mass media and literature

7.5 Cuisine

7.6 Sports

8 See also

9 Notes

10 References

11 Bibliography

12 External links

Etymology

Further information: Names of Indonesia

The name Indonesia derives from Greek Indos (Ἰνδός) and the word nesos (νῆσος), meaning \"Indian islands\". The name dates to the 18th century, far predating the formation of independent Indonesia. In 1850, George Windsor Earl, an English ethnologist, proposed the terms Indunesians—and, his preference, Malayunesians—for the inhabitants of the \"Indian Archipelago or Malayan Archipelago\". In the same publication, one of his students, James Richardson Logan, used Indonesia as a synonym for Indian Archipelago. However, Dutch academics writing in East Indies publications were reluctant to use Indonesia; they preferred Malay Archipelago (Dutch: Maleische Archipel); the Netherlands East Indies (Nederlandsch Oost Indië), popularly Indië; the East (de Oost); and Insulinde.

After 1900, Indonesia became more common in academic circles outside the Netherlands, and native nationalist groups adopted it for political expression. Adolf Bastian, of the University of Berlin, popularised the name through his book Indonesien oder die Inseln des Malayischen Archipels, 1884–1894. The first native scholar to use the name was Ki Hajar Dewantara when in 1913 he established a press bureau in the Netherlands, Indonesisch Pers-bureau.

History

Main article: History of Indonesia

Early history

A Borobudur ship carved on Borobudur temple, c. 800 CE. Outrigger boats from the archipelago may have made trade voyages to the east coast of Africa as early as the 1st century CE.

Fossilised remains of Homo erectus, popularly known as the \"Java Man\", suggest the Indonesian archipelago was inhabited two million to 500,000 years ago. Homo sapiens reached the region around 43,000 BCE. Austronesian peoples, who form the majority of the modern population, migrated to Southeast Asia from what is now Taiwan. They arrived in the archipelago around 2,000 BCE and confined the native Melanesian peoples to the far eastern regions as they spread east. Ideal agricultural conditions and the mastering of wet-field rice cultivation as early as the eighth century BCE allowed villages, towns, and small kingdoms to flourish by the first century CE. The archipelago's strategic sea-lane position fostered inter-island and international trade, including with Indian kingdoms and Chinese dynasties, from several centuries BCE. Trade has since fundamentally shaped Indonesian history.

From the seventh century CE, the Srivijaya naval kingdom flourished as a result of trade and the influences of Hinduism and Buddhism. Between the eighth and tenth centuries CE, the agricultural Buddhist Sailendra and Hindu Mataram dynasties thrived and declined in inland Java, leaving grand religious monuments such as Sailendra's Borobudur and Mataram's Prambanan. The Hindu Majapahit kingdom was founded in eastern Java in the late 13th century, and under Gajah Mada, its influence stretched over much of present-day Indonesia. This period is often referred to as a \"Golden Age\" in Indonesian history.

The earliest evidence of Islamized populations in the archipelago dates to the 13th century in northern Sumatra. Other parts of the archipelago gradually adopted Islam, and it was the dominant religion in Java and Sumatra by the end of the 16th century. For the most part, Islam overlaid and mixed with existing cultural and religious influences, which shaped the predominant form of Islam in Indonesia, particularly in Java.

Colonial era

Main article: Dutch East Indies

The submission of Prince Diponegoro to General De Kock at the end of the Java War in 1830

The first Europeans arrived in the archipelago in 1512, when Portuguese traders, led by Francisco Serrão, sought to monopolise the sources of nutmeg, cloves, and cubeb pepper in the Maluku Islands. Dutch and British traders followed. In 1602, the Dutch established the Dutch East India Company (VOC) and became the dominant European power for almost 200 years. The VOC was dissolved in 1800 following bankruptcy, and the Netherlands established the Dutch East Indies as a nationalised colony.

For most of the colonial period, Dutch control over the archipelago was tenuous. Dutch forces were engaged continuously in quelling rebellions both on and off Java. The influence of local leaders such as Prince Diponegoro in central Java, Imam Bonjol in central Sumatra, Pattimura in Maluku, and bloody 30-year war in Aceh weakened the Dutch and tied up the colonial military forces. Only in the early 20th century did their dominance extend to what was to become Indonesia's current boundaries.

The Japanese invasion and subsequent occupation during World War II ended Dutch rule and encouraged the previously suppressed independence movement. Two days after the surrender of Japan in August 1945, Sukarno and Mohammad Hatta, influential nationalist leaders, proclaimed Indonesian independence and were appointed president and vice-president respectively. The Netherlands attempted to re-establish their rule, and a bitter armed and diplomatic struggle ended in December 1949 when the Dutch formally recognised Indonesian independence in the face of international pressure. Despite extraordinary political, social and sectarian divisions, Indonesians, on the whole, found unity in their fight for independence.

Modern era

Sukarno (left) and Hatta (right), Indonesia's founding fathers and the first President and Vice President

As president, Sukarno moved Indonesia from democracy towards authoritarianism and maintained power by balancing the opposing forces of the military, political Islam, and the increasingly powerful Communist Party of Indonesia (PKI). Tensions between the military and the PKI culminated in an attempted coup in 1965. The army, led by Major General Suharto, countered by instigating a violent anti-communist purge that killed between 500,000 and one million people. The PKI was blamed for the coup and effectively destroyed. Suharto capitalised on Sukarno's weakened position, and following a drawn-out power play with Sukarno, Suharto was appointed president in March 1968. His \"New Order\" administration, supported by the United States, encouraged foreign direct investment, which was a crucial factor in the subsequent three decades of substantial economic growth.

Indonesia was the country hardest hit by the 1997 Asian financial crisis. It brought out popular discontent with the New Order's corruption and suppression of political opposition and ultimately ended Suharto's presidency. In 1999, East Timor seceded from Indonesia, following its 1975 invasion by Indonesia and a 25-year occupation that was marked by international condemnation of human rights abuses.

In the post-Suharto era, democratic processes have been strengthened by enhancing regional autonomy and instituting the country's first direct presidential election in 2004. Political, economic and social instability, corruption, and terrorism remained problems in the 2000s; however, in recent years, the economy has performed strongly. Although relations among the diverse population are mostly harmonious, acute sectarian discontent and violence remain a problem in some areas. A political settlement to an armed separatist conflict in Aceh was achieved in 2005 following the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami that killed 130,000 Indonesians. In 2014, Joko Widodo became the first directly elected president from outside the military and political elite.

Geography

Main articles: Geography of Indonesia and List of islands of Indonesia

Mount Semeru and Mount Bromo in East Java. Indonesia's seismic and volcanic activity is among the world's highest.

Indonesia lies between latitudes 11°S and 6°N, and longitudes 95°E and 141°E. It is the largest archipelagic country in the world, extending 5,120 kilometres (3,181 mi) from east to west and 1,760 kilometres (1,094 mi) from north to south. According to the country's Coordinating Ministry for Maritime and Investments Affairs, Indonesia has 17,504 islands (16,056 of which are registered at the UN), scattered over both sides of the equator, around 6,000 of which are inhabited. The largest are Java, Sumatra, Borneo (shared with Brunei and Malaysia), Sulawesi, and New Guinea (shared with Papua New Guinea). Indonesia shares land borders with Malaysia on Borneo, Papua New Guinea on the island of New Guinea, and East Timor on the island of Timor, and maritime borders with Singapore, Malaysia, Vietnam, the Philippines, Palau, and Australia.

At 4,884 metres (16,024 ft), Puncak Jaya is Indonesia's highest peak, and Lake Toba in Sumatra is the largest lake, with an area of 1,145 km2 (442 sq mi). Indonesia's largest rivers are in Kalimantan and New Guinea and include Kapuas, Barito, Mamberamo, Sepik and Mahakam. They serve as communication and transport links between the island's river settlements.

Climate

Main article: Climate of Indonesia

Typical Indonesian rainforest, mostly found in Kalimantan and Sumatra

Indonesia lies along the equator, and its climate tends to be relatively even year-round. Indonesia has two seasons—a wet season and a dry season—with no extremes of summer or winter. For most of Indonesia, the dry season falls between May and October with the wet season between November and April. Indonesia's climate is almost entirely tropical, dominated by the tropical rainforest climate found in every large island of Indonesia. More cooling climate types do exist in mountainous regions that are 1,300 to 1,500 metres (4,300 to 4,900 feet) above sea level. The oceanic climate (Köppen Cfb) prevails in highland areas adjacent to rainforest climates, with reasonably uniform precipitation year-round. In highland areas near the tropical monsoon and tropical savanna climates, the subtropical highland climate (Köppen Cwb) is prevalent with a more pronounced dry season.

Köppen-Geiger climate classification map for Indonesia

Some regions, such as Kalimantan and Sumatra, experience only slight differences in rainfall and temperature between the seasons, whereas others, such as Nusa Tenggara, experience far more pronounced differences with droughts in the dry season, and floods in the wet. Rainfall varies across regions, with more in western Sumatra, Java, and the interiors of Kalimantan and Papua, and less in areas closer to Australia, such as Nusa Tenggara, which tend to be dry. The almost uniformly warm waters that constitute 81% of Indonesia's area ensure that temperatures on land remain relatively constant. Humidity is quite high, at between 70 and 90%. Winds are moderate and generally predictable, with monsoons usually blowing in from the south and east in June through October, and from the northwest in November through March. Typhoons and large-scale storms pose little hazard to mariners; significant dangers come from swift currents in channels, such as the Lombok and Sape straits.

Geology

Main article: Geology of Indonesia

See also: Volcanoes of Indonesia

Major volcanoes in Indonesia. Indonesia is in the Pacific Ring of Fire area.

Tectonically, Indonesia is highly unstable, making it a site of numerous volcanoes and frequent earthquakes. It lies on the Pacific Ring of Fire where the Indo-Australian Plate and the Pacific Plate are pushed under the Eurasian plate where they melt at about 100 kilometres (62 miles) deep. A string of volcanoes runs through Sumatra, Java, Bali and Nusa Tenggara, and then to the Banda Islands of Maluku to northeastern Sulawesi. Of the 400 volcanoes, around 130 are active. Between 1972 and 1991, there were 29 volcanic eruptions, mostly on Java. Volcanic ash has made agricultural conditions unpredictable in some areas. However, it has also resulted in fertile soils, a factor in historically sustaining high population densities of Java and Bali.

A massive supervolcano erupted at present-day Lake Toba around 70,000 BCE. It is believed to have caused a global volcanic winter and cooling of the climate, and subsequently led to a genetic bottleneck in human evolution, though this is still in debate. The 1815 eruption of Mount Tambora and the 1883 eruption of Krakatoa were among the largest in recorded history. The former caused 92,000 deaths and created an umbrella of volcanic ash which spread and blanketed parts of the archipelago, and made much of Northern Hemisphere without summer in 1816. The latter produced the loudest sound in recorded history and caused 36,000 deaths due to the eruption itself and the resulting tsunamis, with significant additional effects around the world years after the event. Recent catastrophic disasters due to seismic activity include the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and the 2006 Yogyakarta earthquake.

Biodiversity

Main articles: Fauna of Indonesia and Flora of Indonesia

Species endemic to Indonesia. Clockwise from top: Rafflesia arnoldii, orangutan, greater bird-of-paradise, and Komodo dragon.

Indonesia's size, tropical climate, and archipelagic geography support one of the world's highest levels of biodiversity. Its flora and fauna is a mixture of Asian and Australasian species. The islands of the Sunda Shelf (Sumatra, Java, Borneo, and Bali) were once linked to mainland Asia, and have a wealth of Asian fauna. Large species such as the Sumatran tiger, rhinoceros, orangutan, Asian elephant, and leopard were once abundant as far east as Bali, but numbers and distribution have dwindled drastically. Having been long separated from the continental landmasses, Sulawesi, Nusa Tenggara, and Maluku have developed their unique flora and fauna. Papua was part of the Australian landmass and is home to a unique fauna and flora closely related to that of Australia, including over 600 bird species. Forests cover approximately 70% of the country. However, the forests of the smaller, and more densely populated Java, have largely been removed for human habitation and agriculture.

Indonesia is second only to Australia in terms of total endemic species, with 36% of its 1,531 species of bird and 39% of its 515 species of mammal being endemic. Tropical seas surround Indonesia's 80,000 kilometres (50,000 miles) of coastline. The country has a range of sea and coastal ecosystems, including beaches, dunes, estuaries, mangroves, coral reefs, seagrass beds, coastal mudflats, tidal flats, algal beds, and small island ecosystems. Indonesia is one of Coral Triangle countries with the world's most enormous diversity of coral reef fish with more than 1,650 species in eastern Indonesia only.

British naturalist Alfred Russel Wallace described a dividing line (Wallace Line) between the distribution of Indonesia's Asian and Australasian species. It runs roughly north–south along the edge of the Sunda Shelf, between Kalimantan and Sulawesi, and along the deep Lombok Strait, between Lombok and Bali. Flora and fauna on the west of the line are generally Asian, while east from Lombok they are increasingly Australian until the tipping point at the Weber Line. In his 1869 book, The Malay Archipelago, Wallace described numerous species unique to the area. The region of islands between his line and New Guinea is now termed Wallacea.

Environment

Main article: Environment of Indonesia

Deforestation in Riau, Sumatra, to make way for an oil palm plantation

Indonesia's large and growing population and rapid industrialisation present serious environmental issues. They are often given a lower priority due to high poverty levels and weak, under-resourced governance. Problems include the destruction of peatlands, large-scale illegal deforestation—and the resulting Southeast Asian haze—over-exploitation of marine resources, air pollution, garbage management, and reliable water and wastewater services. These issues contribute to Indonesia's poor ranking (number 116 out of 180 countries) in the 2020 Environmental Performance Index. The report also indicates that Indonesia's performance is generally below average in both regional and global context.

Expansion of the palm oil industry requiring significant changes to the natural ecosystems is the one primary factor behind much of Indonesia's deforestation. While it can generate wealth for local communities, it may degrade ecosystems and cause social problems. This situation makes Indonesia the world's largest forest-based emitter of greenhouse gases. It also threatens the survival of indigenous and endemic species. The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) identified 140 species of mammals as threatened, and 15 as critically endangered, including the Bali starling, Sumatran orangutan, and Javan rhinoceros.

Several studies consider Indonesia to be at severe risk from the projected effects of climate change. They predict that unreduced emissions would see an average temperature rise of around 1 °C (2 °F) by mid-century, amounting to almost double the frequency of scorching days (above 35 °C or 95 °F) per year by 2030. That figure is predicted to rise further by the end of the century. It would raise the frequency of drought and food shortages, having an impact on precipitation and the patterns of wet and dry seasons, the basis of Indonesia's agricultural system. It would also encourage diseases and increases in wildfires, which threaten the country's enormous rainforest. Rising sea levels, at current rates, would result in tens of millions of households being at risk of submersion by mid-century. A majority of Indonesia's population lives in low-lying coastal areas, including the capital Jakarta, the fastest-sinking city in the world. Impoverished communities would likely be affected the most by climate change.

Government and politics

Main article: Politics of Indonesia

A presidential inauguration by the MPR in the Parliament Complex Jakarta, 2014

Indonesia is a republic with a presidential system. Following the fall of the New Order in 1998, political and governmental structures have undergone sweeping reforms, with four constitutional amendments revamping the executive, legislative and judicial branches. Chief among them is the delegation of power and authority to various regional entities while remaining a unitary state. The President of Indonesia is the head of state and head of government, commander-in-chief of the Indonesian National Armed Forces (Tentara Nasional Indonesia, TNI), and the director of domestic governance, policy-making, and foreign affairs. The president may serve a maximum of two consecutive five-year terms.

The highest representative body at the national level is the People's Consultative Assembly (Majelis Permusyawaratan Rakyat, MPR). Its main functions are supporting and amending the constitution, inaugurating and impeaching the president, and formalising broad outlines of state policy. The MPR comprises two houses; the People's Representative Council (Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat, DPR), with 575 members, and the Regional Representative Council (Dewan Perwakilan Daerah, DPD), with 136. The DPR passes legislation and monitors the executive branch. Reforms since 1998 have markedly increased its role in national governance, while the DPD is a new chamber for matters of regional management.

Most civil disputes appear before the State Court (Pengadilan Negeri); appeals are heard before the High Court (Pengadilan Tinggi). The Supreme Court of Indonesia (Mahkamah Agung) is the highest level of the judicial branch, and hears final cessation appeals and conducts case reviews. Other courts include the Constitutional Court (Mahkamah Konstitusi) that listens to constitutional and political matters and the Religious Court (Pengadilan Agama) that deals with codified Islamic Law (sharia) cases. Additionally, the Judicial Commission (Komisi Yudisial) monitors the performance of judges.

Parties and elections

Main articles: List of political parties in Indonesia and Elections in Indonesia

Joko Widodo

7th President of Indonesia

Ma'ruf Amin

13th Vice President of Indonesia

Since 1999, Indonesia has had a multi-party system. In all legislative elections since the fall of the New Order, no political party has managed to win an overall majority of seats. The Indonesian Democratic Party of Struggle (PDI-P), which secured the most votes in the 2019 elections, is the party of the incumbent President, Joko Widodo. Other notable parties include the Party of the Functional Groups (Golkar), the Great Indonesia Movement Party (Gerindra), the Democratic Party, and the Prosperous Justice Party (PKS). The 2019 elections resulted in nine political parties in the DPR, with a parliamentary threshold of 4% of the national vote. The first general election was held in 1955 to elect members of the DPR and the Constitutional Assembly (Konstituante). At the national level, Indonesians did not elect a president until 2004. Since then, the president is elected for a five-year term, as are the party-aligned members of the DPR and the non-partisan DPD. Beginning with 2015 local elections, elections for governors and mayors have occurred on the same date. As of 2019, both legislative and presidential elections coincide.

Administrative divisions

Main article: Subdivisions of Indonesia

Indonesia has several levels of subdivisions. The first level is that of the provinces, with five out of a total of 34 having a special status. Each has a legislature (Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat Daerah, DPRD) and an elected governor. This number has evolved, with the most recent change being the split of North Kalimantan from East Kalimantan in 2012. The second level is that of the regencies (kabupaten) and cities (kota), led by regents (bupati) and mayors (walikota) respectively and a legislature (DPRD Kabupaten/Kota). The third level is that of the districts (kecamatan, distrik in Papua, or kapanewon and kemantren in Yogyakarta), and the fourth is of the villages (either desa, kelurahan, kampung, nagari in West Sumatra, or gampong in Aceh).

The village is the lowest level of government administration. It is divided into several community groups (rukun warga, RW), which are further divided into neighbourhood groups (rukun tetangga, RT). In Java, the village (desa) is divided into smaller units called dusun or dukuh (hamlets), which are the same as RW. Following the implementation of regional autonomy measures in 2001, regencies and cities have become chief administrative units, responsible for providing most government services. The village administration level is the most influential on a citizen's daily life and handles matters of a village or neighbourhood through an elected village chief (lurah or kepala desa).

Aceh, Jakarta, Yogyakarta, Papua, and West Papua have greater legislative privileges and a higher degree of autonomy from the central government than the other provinces. A conservative Islamic territory, Aceh has the right to create some aspects of an independent legal system implementing sharia. Yogyakarta is the only pre-colonial monarchy legally recognised in Indonesia, with the positions of governor and vice governor being prioritised for descendants of the Sultan of Yogyakarta and Paku Alam, respectively. Papua and West Papua are the only provinces where the indigenous people have privileges in their local government. Jakarta is the only city granted a provincial government due to its position as the capital of Indonesia.

Aceh

North

Sumatra

West

Sumatra

Riau

Riau

Islands

Bangka

Belitung

Jambi

South

Sumatra

Bengkulu

Lampung

Banten

Jakarta

West

Java

Central

Java

Yogyakarta

East

Java

Bali

West Nusa

Tenggara

East Nusa

Tenggara

West

Kalimantan

Central

Kalimantan

North

Kalimantan

East

Kalimantan

South

Kalimantan

North

Sulawesi

North

Maluku

Central

Sulawesi

Gorontalo

West

Sulawesi

South

Sulawesi

Southeast

Sulawesi

Maluku

West

Papua

Papua

Foreign relations

Main article: Foreign relations of Indonesia

Embassy of Indonesia, Canberra, Australia

Indonesia maintains 132 diplomatic missions abroad, including 95 embassies. The country adheres to what it calls a \"free and active\" foreign policy, seeking a role in regional affairs in proportion to its size and location but avoiding involvement in conflicts among other countries.

Indonesia was a significant battleground during the Cold War. Numerous attempts by the United States and the Soviet Union, and China to some degree, culminated in the 1965 coup attempt and subsequent upheaval that led to a reorientation of foreign policy. Quiet alignment with the West while maintaining a non-aligned stance has characterised Indonesia's foreign policy since then. Today, it maintains close relations with its neighbours and is a founding member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the East Asia Summit. In common with most of the Muslim world, Indonesia does not have diplomatic relations with Israel and has actively supported Palestine. However, observers have pointed out that Indonesia has ties with Israel, albeit discreetly.

Indonesia has been a member of the United Nations since 1950 and was a founding member of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC). Indonesia is a signatory to the ASEAN Free Trade Area agreement, the Cairns Group, and the World Trade Organization (WTO), and an occasional member of OPEC. During the Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation, Indonesia withdrew from the UN due to the latter's election to the United Nations Security Council, although it returned 18 months later. It marked the first time in UN history that a member state had attempted a withdrawal. Indonesia has been a humanitarian and development aid recipient since 1966, and recently, the country has expressed interest in becoming an aid donor.

Military

Main articles: Indonesian National Armed Forces and Military history of Indonesia

Indonesian Armed Forces. Clockwise from top: Indonesian Army during training session, Sukhoi Su-30, Pindad Anoa, and Indonesian naval vessel KRI Sultan Iskandar Muda 367.

Indonesia's Armed Forces (TNI) include the Army (TNI–AD), Navy (TNI–AL, which includes Marine Corps), and Air Force (TNI–AU). The army has about 400,000 active-duty personnel. Defence spending in the national budget was 0.7% of GDP in 2018, with controversial involvement of military-owned commercial interests and foundations. The Armed Forces were formed during the Indonesian National Revolution when it undertook guerrilla warfare along with informal militia. Since then, territorial lines have formed the basis of all TNI branches' structure, aimed at maintaining domestic stability and deterring foreign threats. The military has possessed a strong political influence since its founding, which peaked during the New Order. Political reforms in 1998 included the removal of the TNI's formal representation from the legislature. Nevertheless, its political influence remains, albeit at a reduced level.

Since independence, the country has struggled to maintain unity against local insurgencies and separatist movements. Some, notably in Aceh and Papua, have led to an armed conflict, and subsequent allegations of human rights abuses and brutality from all sides. The former was resolved peacefully in 2005, while the latter continues, amid a significant, albeit imperfect, implementation of regional autonomy laws, and a reported decline in the levels of violence and human rights abuses since 2004. Other engagements of the army include the campaign against the Netherlands New Guinea to incorporate the territory into Indonesia, the Konfrontasi to oppose the creation of Malaysia, the mass killings of PKI, and the invasion of East Timor, which remains Indonesia's most massive military operation.

Economy

Main articles: Economy of Indonesia and Economic history of Indonesia

Jakarta, the capital city and the country's commercial centre

Indonesia has a mixed economy in which both the private sector and government play vital roles. As the only G20 member state in Southeast Asia, the country has the largest economy in the region and is classified as a newly industrialised country. As of 2019, it is the world's 16th largest economy by nominal GDP and 7th in terms of GDP at PPP, estimated to be US$1.100 trillion and US$3.740 trillion respectively. Per capita GDP in PPP is US$14,020, while nominal per capita GDP is US$4,120. The debt ratio to GDP is 29.2%. The services are the economy's largest sector and account for 43.4% of GDP (2018), followed by industry (39.7%) and agriculture (12.8%). Since 2009, it has employed more people than other sectors, accounting for 47.7% of the total labour force, followed by agriculture (30.2%) and industry (21.9%).

Vast palm oil plantation in Bogor, West Java. Currently, Indonesia is the world's largest producer of palm oil.

Over time, the structure of the economy has changed considerably. Historically, it has been weighted heavily towards agriculture, reflecting both its stage of economic development and government policies in the 1950s and 1960s to promote agricultural self-sufficiency. A gradual process of industrialisation and urbanisation began in the late 1960s and accelerated in the 1980s as falling oil prices saw the government focus on diversifying away from oil exports and towards manufactured exports. This development continued throughout the 1980s and into the next decade despite the 1990 oil price shock, during which the GDP rose at an average rate of 7.1%. As a result, the official poverty rate fell from 60% to 15%. Reduction of trade barriers from the mid-1980s made the economy more globally integrated. The growth, however, ended with the 1997 Asian financial crisis, which affected the economy severely. It caused a real GDP contraction by 13.1% in 1998, and inflation reached 72%. The economy reached its low point in mid-1999 with only 0.8% real GDP growth.

Relatively steady inflation and an increase in GDP deflator and the Consumer Price Index have contributed to strong economic growth in recent years. Since 2007, annual growth has accelerated to between 4% and 6% as a result of improvement in the banking sector and domestic consumption, helping Indonesia weather the 2008–2009 Great Recession. In 2011, the country regained the investment grade rating it had lost in 1997. As of 2019, 9.41% of the population lived below the poverty line, and the official open unemployment rate was 5.28%.

Indonesia has abundant natural resources like oil and natural gas, coal, tin, copper, gold, and nickel, while agriculture produces rice, palm oil, tea, coffee, cacao, medicinal plants, spices, and rubber. These commodities make up a large portion of the country's exports, with palm oil and coal briquettes as the leading export commodities. In addition to refined and crude petroleum as the main imports, telephones, vehicle parts and wheat cover the majority of additional imports. China, the United States, Japan, Singapore, India, Malaysia, South Korea and Thailand are Indonesia's principal export markets and import partners.

Transport

Main article: Transport in Indonesia

Major transport modes in Indonesia. Clockwise from top: TransJakarta bus, Jabodetabek Commuter Line, Garuda Indonesia Boeing 737-800, Pelni ship.

Indonesia's transport system has been shaped over time by the economic resource base of an archipelago, and the distribution of its 250 million people highly concentrated on Java. All transport modes play a role in the country's transport system and are generally complementary rather than competitive. In 2016, the transport sector generated about 5.2% of GDP.

The road transport system is predominant, with a total length of 542,310 kilometres (336,980 miles) as of 2018. Jakarta has the most extended bus rapid transit system in the world, boasting some 251.2 kilometres (156.1 miles) in 13 corridors and ten cross-corridor routes. Rickshaws such as bajaj and becak and share taxis such as Angkot and Metromini are a regular sight in the country. Most of the railways are in Java, used for both freight and passenger transport, such as local commuter rail services complementing the inter-city rail network in several cities. In the late 2010s, Jakarta and Palembang were the first cities in Indonesia to have rapid transit systems, with more planned for other cities in the future. In 2015, the government announced a plan to build a high-speed rail, which would be a first in Southeast Asia.

Indonesia's largest airport, Soekarno–Hatta International Airport is the busiest in the Southern Hemisphere, serving 66 million passengers in 2018. Ngurah Rai International Airport and Juanda International Airport are the country's second- and third-busiest airport respectively. Garuda Indonesia, the country's flag carrier since 1949, is one of the world's leading airlines and a member of the global airline alliance SkyTeam. Port of Tanjung Priok is the busiest and most advanced Indonesian port, handling more than 50% of Indonesia's trans-shipment cargo traffic.

Energy

Main article: Energy in Indonesia

In 2017, Indonesia was the world's 9th largest energy producer with 4,200 terawatt-hours (14.2 quadrillion British thermal units), and the 15th largest energy consumer, with 2,100 terawatt-hours (7.1 quadrillion British thermal units). The country has substantial energy resources, including 22 billion barrels (3.5 billion cubic metres) of conventional oil and gas reserves (of which about 4 billion barrels are recoverable), 8 billion barrels of oil-equivalent of coal-based methane (CBM) resources, and 28 billion tonnes of recoverable coal. While reliance on domestic coal and imported oil has increased, Indonesia has seen progress in renewable energy with hydropower being the most abundant source. Furthermore, the country has the potential for geothermal, solar, wind, biomass and ocean energy. Indonesia has set out to achieve 23% use of renewable energy by 2025 and 31% by 2050. As of 2015, Indonesia's total national installed power generation capacity stands at 55,528.51 MW.

The country's largest dam, Jatiluhur, has several purposes including the provision of hydroelectric power generation, water supply, flood control, irrigation and aquaculture. The earth-fill dam is 105 m (344 ft) high and withholds a reservoir of 3.0 billion m3 (2.4 million acre⋅ft). It helps to supply water to Jakarta and to irrigate 240,000 ha (590,000 acres) of rice fields and has an installed capacity of 186.5 MW which feeds into the Java grid managed by the State Electricity Company (Perusahaan Listrik Negara, PLN).

Science and technology

Main article: Science and technology in Indonesia

Palapa satellite launch in 1984

Indonesia's expenditure on science and technology is relatively low, at less than 0.1% of GDP (2017). Historical examples of scientific and technological developments include the paddy cultivation technique terasering, which is common in Southeast Asia, and the pinisi boats by the Bugis and Makassar people. In the 1980s, Indonesian engineer Tjokorda Raka Sukawati invented a road construction technique named Sosrobahu that allows the construction of long stretches of flyovers above existing main roads with minimum traffic disruption. It later became widely used in several countries. The country is also an active producer of passenger trains and freight wagons with its state-owned company, the Indonesian Railway Industry (INKA), and has exported trains abroad.

Indonesia has a long history in developing military and small commuter aircraft as the only country in Southeast Asia to build and produce aircraft. With its state-owned company, the Indonesian Aerospace (PT. Dirgantara Indonesia), Indonesia has provided components for Boeing and Airbus. The company also collaborated with EADS CASA of Spain to develop the CN-235 that has seen use by several countries. Former President B. J. Habibie played a vital role in this achievement. Indonesia has also joined the South Korean programme to manufacture the fifth-generation jet fighter KAI KF-X.

Indonesia has a space programme and space agency, the National Institute of Aeronautics and Space (Lembaga Penerbangan dan Antariksa Nasional, LAPAN). In the 1970s, Indonesia became the first developing country to operate a satellite system called Palapa, a series of communication satellites owned by Indosat Ooredoo. The first satellite, PALAPA A1 was launched on 8 July 1976 from the Kennedy Space Center in Florida, United States. As of 2019, Indonesia has launched 18 satellites for various purposes, and LAPAN has expressed a desire to put satellites in orbit with native launch vehicles by 2040.

Tourism

Main article: Tourism in Indonesia

Borobudur in Central Java, the world's largest Buddhist temple, is the single most visited tourist attraction in Indonesia.

Tourism contributed around US$19.7 billion to GDP in 2019. In 2018, Indonesia received 15.8 million visitors, a growth of 12.5% from last year, and received an average receipt of US$967. China, Singapore, Malaysia, Australia, and Japan are the top five sources of visitors to Indonesia. Since 2011, Wonderful Indonesia has been the slogan of the country's international marketing campaign to promote tourism.

Raja Ampat Islands, West Papua, has the highest recorded level of diversity in marine life according to Conservation International.

Nature and culture are prime attractions of Indonesian tourism. The former can boast a unique combination of a tropical climate, a vast archipelago, and a long stretch of beaches, and the latter complement those with a rich cultural heritage reflecting Indonesia's dynamic history and ethnic diversity. Indonesia has a well-preserved natural ecosystem with rain forests that stretch over about 57% of Indonesia's land (225 million acres). Forests on Sumatra and Kalimantan are examples of popular destinations, such as the Orangutan wildlife reserve. Moreover, Indonesia has one of the world's longest coastlines, measuring 54,716 kilometres (33,999 mi). The ancient Borobudur and Prambanan temples as well as Toraja and Bali, with its traditional festivities, are some of the popular destinations for cultural tourism.

Indonesia has nine UNESCO World Heritage Sites, including the Komodo National Park and the Sawahlunto Coal Mine; and a further 19 in a tentative list that includes Bunaken National Park and Raja Ampat Islands. Other attractions include the specific points in Indonesian history, such as the colonial heritage of the Dutch East Indies in the old towns of Jakarta and Semarang, and the royal palaces of Pagaruyung, Ubud, and Yogyakarta.

Demographics

Main articles: Demographics of Indonesia and Indonesians

See also: List of Indonesian cities by population and List of metropolitan areas in Indonesia

Population pyramid 2016

The 2010 census recorded Indonesia's population as 237.6 million, the fourth largest in the world, with high population growth at 1.9%. Java is the world's most populous island, where 58% of the country's population lives. The population density is 138 people per km2 (357 per sq mi), ranking 88th in the world, although Java has a population density of 1,067 people per km2 (2,435 per sq mi). In 1961, the first post-colonial census recorded a total of 97 million people. It is expected to grow to around 295 million by 2030 and 321 million by 2050. The country currently possesses a relatively young population, with a median age of 30.2 years (2017 estimate).

The spread of the population is uneven throughout the archipelago with a varying habitat and level of development, ranging from the megacity of Jakarta to uncontacted tribes in Papua. As of 2010, about 49.7% of the population lives in urban areas. Jakarta is the country's primate city and the second-most populous urban area in the world with over 34 million residents. About 8 million Indonesians live overseas; most settled in Malaysia, the Netherlands, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Hong Kong, Singapore, the United States, and Australia.

v

t

e

Largest cities in Indonesia

2015 inter-census survey

Rank
Name
Province
 Pop.
Rank
Name
Province
 Pop.

Jakarta

Surabaya
 1 Jakarta Jakarta 10,154,134 11 Makassar South Sulawesi 1,447,677

Bekasi

Bandung

2 Surabaya East Java 2,847,480 12 Batam Riau Islands 1,184,978

3 Bekasi West Java 2,708,721 13 Bogor West Java 1,046,579

4 Bandung West Java 2,480,615 14 Pekanbaru Riau 1,035,834

5 Medan North Sumatra 2,209,139 15 Bandar Lampung Lampung 977,686

6 Depok West Java 2,099,989 16 Padang West Sumatra 901,305

7 Tangerang Banten 2,043,213 17 Denpasar Bali 879,098

8 Semarang Central Java 1,698,777 18 Malang East Java 850,904

9 Palembang South Sumatra 1,578,582 19 Samarinda East Kalimantan 811,314

10 South Tangerang Banten 1,538,970 20 Banjarmasin South Kalimantan 674,739

Ethnic groups and languages

Main articles: Ethnic groups in Indonesia, Native Indonesians, and Languages of Indonesia

A map of ethnic groups in Indonesia

Indonesia is an ethnically diverse country, with around 300 distinct native ethnic groups. Most Indonesians are descended from Austronesian peoples whose languages had origins in Proto-Austronesian, which possibly originated in what is now Taiwan. Another major grouping is the Melanesians, who inhabit eastern Indonesia (the Maluku Islands and Western New Guinea).

The Javanese are the largest ethnic group, constituting 40.2% of the population, and are politically dominant. They are predominantly located in the central to eastern parts of Java and also sizable numbers in most provinces. The Sundanese, Malay, Batak, Madurese, Minangkabau and Buginese are the next largest groups in the country. A sense of Indonesian nationhood exists alongside strong regional identities.

The country's official language is Indonesian, a variant of Malay based on its prestige dialect, which for centuries had been the lingua franca of the archipelago. It was promoted by nationalists in the 1920s and achieved official status under the name Bahasa Indonesia in 1945. As a result of centuries-long contact with other languages, it is rich in local and foreign influences, including from Javanese, Sundanese, Minangkabau, Hindi, Sanskrit, Chinese, Arabic, Dutch, Portuguese and English. Nearly every Indonesian speaks the language due to its widespread use in education, academics, communications, business, politics, and mass media. Most Indonesians also speak at least one of more than 700 local languages, often as their first language. Most belong to the Austronesian language family, while there are over 270 Papuan languages spoken in eastern Indonesia. Of these, Javanese is the most widely spoken.

In 1930, Dutch and other Europeans (Totok), Eurasians, and derivative people like the Indos, numbered 240,000 or 0.4% of the total population. Historically, they constituted only a tiny fraction of the native population and continue to do so today. Despite the Dutch presence for almost 350 years, the Dutch language never had a substantial number of speakers or official status. The small minorities that can speak it or Dutch-based creole languages fluently are the aforementioned ethnic groups and descendants of Dutch colonisers. Today, there is some degree of fluency by either educated members of the oldest generation or legal professionals, as specific law codes are still only available in Dutch.

Religion

Main article: Religion in Indonesia

Religion in Indonesia (2018)

 Islam (86.70%)

Protestantism (7.60%)

Roman Catholicism (3.12%)

Hinduism (1.74%)

Buddhism (0.77%)

Confucianism (0.03%)

Folk (0.04%)

While the constitution stipulates religious freedom, the government officially recognises only six religions: Islam, Protestantism, Roman Catholicism, Hinduism, Buddhism, and Confucianism; with indigenous religions only partly acknowledged. Indonesia is the world's most populous Muslim-majority country with 227 million adherents in 2017, with the majority being Sunnis (99%). The Shias and Ahmadis respectively constitute 1% (1–3 million) and 0.2% (200,000–400,000) of the Muslim population. Almost 10% of Indonesians are Christians, while the rest are Hindus, Buddhists, and others. Most Hindus are Balinese, and most Buddhists are Chinese Indonesians.

A Hindu shrine dedicated to Sri Baduga Maharaja in Pura Parahyangan Agung Jagatkarta, Bogor. Hinduism has left a lasting impact in Indonesian art and culture.

The natives of the Indonesian archipelago originally practised indigenous animism and dynamism, beliefs that are common to Austronesian people. They worshipped and revered ancestral spirit, and believed that supernatural spirits (hyang) might inhabit certain places such as large trees, stones, forests, mountains, or sacred sites. Examples of Indonesian native belief systems include the Sundanese Sunda Wiwitan, Dayak's Kaharingan, and the Javanese Kejawèn. They have had a significant impact on how other faiths are practised, evidenced by a large proportion of people—such as the Javanese abangan, Balinese Hindus, and Dayak Christians—practising a less orthodox, syncretic form of their religion.

Hindu influences reached the archipelago as early as the first century CE. The Sundanese kingdom of Salakanagara in western Java around 130 was the first historically recorded Indianised kingdom in the archipelago. Buddhism arrived around the 6th century, and its history in Indonesia is closely related to that of Hinduism, as some empires based on Buddhism had its roots around the same period. The archipelago has witnessed the rise and fall of powerful and influential Hindu and Buddhist empires such as Majapahit, Sailendra, Srivijaya, and Mataram. Though no longer a majority, Hinduism and Buddhism remain defining influences in Indonesian culture.

Eid al-Fitr mass prayer in Istiqlal Mosque, Jakarta

Islam was introduced by Sunni traders of the Shafi'i fiqh, as well as Sufi traders from the Indian subcontinent and southern Arabian peninsula as early as the 8th century CE. For the most part, Islam overlaid and mixed with existing cultural and religious influences that resulted in a distinct form of Islam. Trade, missionary works such as by the Wali Sanga and Chinese explorer Zheng He, and military campaigns by several sultanates helped accelerate the spread of the religion. By the end of the 16th century, Islam had supplanted Hinduism and Buddhism as the dominant religion of Java and Sumatra.

Catholic Mass at the Jakarta Cathedral

Catholicism was brought by Portuguese traders and missionaries such as Jesuit Francis Xavier, who visited and baptised several thousand locals. Its spread faced difficulty due to the VOC policy of banning the religion and the Dutch hostility due to the Eighty Years' War against Catholic Spain's rule. Protestantism is mostly a result of Calvinist and Lutheran missionary efforts during the Dutch colonial era. Although they are the most common branch, there is a multitude of other denominations elsewhere in the country.

There was a sizable Jewish presence in the archipelago until 1945, mostly Dutch and some Baghdadi Jews. Since most have left after Indonesia proclaimed independence, Judaism was never accorded official status, and only a tiny number of Jews remain today, mostly in Jakarta and Surabaya. At the national and local level, Indonesia's political leadership and civil society groups have played a crucial role in interfaith relations, both positively and negatively. The invocation of the first principle of Indonesia's philosophical foundation, Pancasila (the belief in the one and only God) often serves as a reminder of religious tolerance, though instances of intolerance have occurred. An overwhelming majority of Indonesians consider religion to be essential, and its role is present in almost all aspects of society, including politics, education, marriage, and public holidays.

Education and health

Main articles: Education in Indonesia and Health in Indonesia

Bandung Institute of Technology in West Java

Education is compulsory for 12 years. Parents can choose between state-run, non-sectarian schools or private or semi-private religious (usually Islamic) schools, supervised by the ministries of Education and Religion, respectively. Private international schools that do not follow the national curriculum are also available. The enrolment rate is 90% for primary education, 76% for secondary education, and 24% for tertiary education (2015). The literacy rate is 95% (2016), and the government spends about 3.6% of GDP (2015) on education. In 2018, there were more than 4,500 higher educational institutions in Indonesia. The top universities are the Java-based University of Indonesia, Bandung Institute of Technology and Gadjah Mada University. Andalas University is pioneering the establishment of a leading university outside of Java.

Government expenditure on healthcare is about 3.3% of GDP in 2016. As part of an attempt to achieve universal health care, the government launched the National Health Insurance (Jaminan Kesehatan Nasional, JKN) in 2014 that provides health care to citizens. They include coverage for a range of services from the public and also private firms that have opted to join the scheme. In recent decades, there have been remarkable improvements such as rising life expectancy (from 63 in 1990 to 71 in 2012) and declining child mortality (from 84 deaths per 1,000 births in 1990 to 27 deaths in 2015). Nevertheless, Indonesia continues to face challenges that include maternal and child health, low air quality, malnutrition, high rate of smoking, and infectious diseases.

Issues

Main article: Human rights in Indonesia

Nearly 80% of Indonesia's population lives in the western parts of the archipelago, but they are growing at a slower pace than the rest of the country. This situation creates a gap in wealth, unemployment rate, and health between densely populated islands and economic centres (such as Sumatra and Java) and sparsely populated, disadvantaged areas (such as Maluku and Papua). Racism, especially against Chinese Indonesians since the colonial period, is still prevalent today. There has been a marked increase of religious intolerance since 1998, with the most recent high-profile case being that of Chinese Christian former governor of Jakarta, Basuki Tjahaja Purnama. LGBT issues have recently gained attention in Indonesia. While homosexuality is legal in most parts of the country, it is illegal in Aceh and South Sumatra. LGBT people and activists have regularly faced fierce opposition, intimidation, and discrimination launched even by authorities.

Culture

Main article: Culture of Indonesia

See also: Public holidays in Indonesia

The cultural history of the Indonesian archipelago spans more than two millennia. Influences from the Indian subcontinent, mainland China, the Middle East, Europe, and the Austronesian peoples have historically shaped the cultural, linguistic and religious make-up of the archipelago. As a result, modern-day Indonesia has a multicultural, multilingual and multi-ethnic society, with a complex cultural mixture that differs significantly from the original indigenous cultures. Indonesia currently holds ten items of UNESCO's Intangible Cultural Heritage, including a wayang puppet theatre, kris, batik, pencak silat, angklung, and the three genres of traditional Balinese dance.

Art and architecture

Main articles: Indonesian art and Architecture of Indonesia

Traditional Balinese painting depicting cockfighting

Indonesian arts include both age-old art forms developed through centuries and a recently developed contemporary art. Despite often displaying local ingenuity, Indonesian arts have absorbed foreign influences—most notably from India, the Arab world, China and Europe, as a result of contacts and interactions facilitated, and often motivated, by trade. Painting is an established and developed art in Bali, where its people are famed for their artistry. Their painting tradition started as classical Kamasan or Wayang style visual narrative, derived from visual art discovered on candi bas reliefs in eastern Java.

An avenue of Tongkonan houses in a Torajan village, South Sulawesi

There have been numerous discoveries of megalithic sculptures in Indonesia. Subsequently, tribal art has flourished within the culture of Nias, Batak, Asmat, Dayak and Toraja. Wood and stone are common materials used as the media for sculpting among these tribes. Between the 8th and 15th centuries, the Javanese civilisation has developed a refined stone sculpting art and architecture which was influenced by Hindu-Buddhist Dharmic civilisation. The temples of Borobudur and Prambanan are among the most famous examples of the practice.

As with the arts, Indonesian architecture has absorbed foreign influences that have brought cultural changes and profound effect on building styles and techniques. The most dominant has traditionally been Indian; however, Chinese, Arab, and European influences have also been significant. Traditional carpentry, masonry, stone and woodwork techniques and decorations have thrived in vernacular architecture, with numbers of traditional houses' (rumah adat) styles that have been developed. The traditional houses and settlements in the country vary by ethnic groups, and each has a specific custom and history. Examples include Toraja's Tongkonan, Minangkabau's Rumah Gadang and Rangkiang, Javanese style Pendopo pavilion with Joglo style roof, Dayak's longhouses, various Malay houses, Balinese houses and temples, and also different forms of rice barns (lumbung).

Music, dance and clothing

Main articles: Music of Indonesia, Dance in Indonesia, and National costume of Indonesia

Indonesian music and dance. Clockwise from top: A gamelan player, Angklung, Sundanese Jaipongan Mojang Priangan dance, Balinese Pendet dance.

The music of Indonesia predates historical records. Various indigenous tribes incorporate chants and songs accompanied by musical instruments in their rituals. Angklung, kacapi suling, gong, gamelan, talempong, kulintang, and sasando are examples of traditional Indonesian instruments. The diverse world of Indonesian music genres is the result of the musical creativity of its people, and subsequent cultural encounters with foreign influences. These include gambus and qasida from the Middle East, keroncong from Portugal, and dangdut—one of the most popular music genres in Indonesia—with notable Hindi influence as well as Malay orchestras. Today, the Indonesian music industry enjoys both nationwide and regional popularity in Malaysia, Singapore, and Brunei, due to common culture and intelligible languages between Indonesian and Malay.

An Indonesian batik

Indonesian dances have a diverse history, with more than 3,000 original dances. Scholars believe that they had their beginning in rituals and religious worship. Examples include war dances, a dance of witch doctors, and dance to call for rain or any agricultural rituals such as Hudoq. Indonesian dances derive its influences from the archipelago's prehistoric and tribal, Hindu-Buddhist, and Islamic periods. Recently, modern dances and urban teen dances have gained popularity due to the influence of Western culture, as well as those of Japan and South Korea to some extent. Traditional dances, however, such as the Javanese, Sundanese, Minang, Balinese, Saman continue to be a living and dynamic tradition.

Indonesia has various styles of clothing as a result of its long and rich cultural history. The national costume has its origins in the indigenous culture of the country and traditional textile traditions. The Javanese Batik and Kebaya are arguably Indonesia's most recognised national costume, though they have Sundanese and Balinese origins as well. Each province has a representation of traditional attire and dress, such as Ulos of Batak from North Sumatra; Songket of Malay and Minangkabau from Sumatra; and Ikat of Sasak from Lombok. People wear national and regional costumes during traditional weddings, formal ceremonies, music performances, government and official occasions, and they vary from traditional to modern attire.

Theatre and cinema

Main article: Cinema of Indonesia

Pandava and Krishna in an act of the Wayang Wong performance

Wayang, the Javanese, Sundanese, and Balinese shadow puppet theatre display several mythological legends such as Ramayana and Mahabharata. Other forms of local drama include the Javanese Ludruk and Ketoprak, the Sundanese Sandiwara, Betawi Lenong, and various Balinese dance drama. They incorporate humour and jest and often involve audiences in their performances. Some theatre traditions also include music, dancing and the silat martial art such as Randai from Minangkabau people of West Sumatra. It is usually performed for traditional ceremonies and festivals, and based on semi-historical Minangkabau legends and love story. Modern performing art also developed in Indonesia with their distinct style of drama. Notable theatre, dance, and drama troupe such as Teater Koma are famous as it often portrays social and political satire of Indonesian society.

Advertisement for Loetoeng Kasaroeng (1926), the first fiction film produced in the Dutch East Indies

The first film produced in the archipelago was Loetoeng Kasaroeng, a silent film by Dutch director L. Heuveldorp. The film industry expanded after independence, with six films made in 1949 rising to 58 in 1955. Usmar Ismail, who made significant imprints in the 1950s and 1960s, is generally considered to be the pioneer of Indonesian films. The latter part of the Sukarno era saw the use of cinema for nationalistic, anti-Western purposes, and foreign films were subsequently banned, while the New Order utilised a censorship code that aimed to maintain social order. Production of films peaked during the 1980s, although it declined significantly in the next decade. Notable films in this period include Pengabdi Setan (1980), Nagabonar (1987), Tjoet Nja' Dhien (1988), Catatan Si Boy (1989), and Warkop's comedy films.

Independent filmmaking was a rebirth of the film industry since 1998, where films started addressing previously banned topics, such as religion, race, and love. Between 2000 and 2005, the number of films released each year steadily increased. Riri Riza and Mira Lesmana were among the new generation of filmmakers who co-directed Kuldesak (1999), Petualangan Sherina (2000), Ada Apa dengan Cinta? (2002), and Laskar Pelangi (2008). In 2016, Warkop DKI Reborn: Jangkrik Boss Part 1 smashed box office records, becoming the most-watched Indonesian film with 6.8 million tickets sold. Indonesia has held annual film festivals and awards, including the Indonesian Film Festival (Festival Film Indonesia) that has been held intermittently since 1955. It hands out the Citra Award, the film industry's most prestigious award. From 1973 to 1992, the festival was held annually and then discontinued until its revival in 2004.

Mass media and literature

Main articles: Mass media in Indonesia and Indonesian literature

Metro TV at Gelora Bung Karno Stadium, reporting the 2010 AFF Championship

Media freedom increased considerably after the fall of the New Order, during which the Ministry of Information monitored and controlled domestic media and restricted foreign media. The television market includes several national commercial networks and provincial networks that compete with public TVRI, which held a monopoly on TV broadcasting from 1962 to 1989. By the early 21st century, the improved communications system had brought television signals to every village and people can choose from up to 11 channels. Private radio stations carry news bulletins while foreign broadcasters supply programmes. The number of printed publications has increased significantly since 1998.

Like other developing countries, Indonesia began development of the Internet in the early 1990s. Its first commercial Internet service provider, PT. Indo Internet began operation in Jakarta in 1994. The country had 171 million Internet users in 2018, with a penetration rate that keeps increasing annually. Most are between the ages of 15 and 19 and depend primarily on mobile phones for access, outnumbering both laptops and computers.

Pramoedya Ananta Toer, Indonesia's most famous novelist. Many considered him to be Southeast Asia's leading candidate for a Nobel Prize in Literature.

The oldest evidence of writing in the Indonesian archipelago is a series of Sanskrit inscriptions dated to the 5th century. Many of Indonesia's peoples have firmly rooted oral traditions, which help to define and preserve their cultural identities. In written poetry and prose, several traditional forms dominate, mainly syair, pantun, gurindam, hikayat and babad. Examples of these forms include Syair Abdul Muluk, Hikayat Hang Tuah, Sulalatus Salatin, and Babad Tanah Jawi.

Early modern Indonesian literature originates in Sumatran tradition. Literature and poetry flourished during the decades leading up to and after independence. Balai Pustaka, the government bureau for popular literature, was instituted in 1917 to promote the development of indigenous literature. Many scholars consider the 1950s and 1960s to be the Golden Age of Indonesian Literature. The style and characteristics of modern Indonesian literature vary according to the dynamics of the country's political and social landscape, most notably the war of independence in the second half of 1940s and the anti-communist mass killings in the mid-1960s. Notable literary figures of the modern era include Multatuli, Mohammad Yamin, Merari Siregar, Marah Roesli, Pramoedya Ananta Toer, and Ayu Utami.

Cuisine

Main article: Indonesian cuisine

Nasi Padang with rendang, gulai and vegetables

Indonesian cuisine is one of the most diverse, vibrant, and colourful in the world, full of intense flavour. Many regional cuisines exist, often based upon indigenous culture and foreign influences such as Chinese, European, Middle Eastern, and Indian precedents. Rice is the leading staple food and is served with side dishes of meat and vegetables. Spices (notably chilli), coconut milk, fish and chicken are fundamental ingredients.

Some popular dishes such as nasi goreng, gado-gado, sate, and soto are prevalent and considered as national dishes. The Ministry of Tourism, however, chose tumpeng as the official national dish in 2014, describing it as binding the diversity of various culinary traditions. Other popular dishes include rendang, one of the many Padang cuisines along with dendeng and gulai. In 2017, rendang was chosen as the \"World's Most Delicious Food\" by the CNN Travel reader's choice. Another fermented food is oncom, similar in some ways to tempeh but uses a variety of bases (not only soy), created by different fungi, and particularly popular in West Java.

Sports

Main article: Sport in Indonesia

A demonstration of Pencak Silat, a form of martial arts

Sports are generally male-oriented, and spectators are often associated with illegal gambling. Badminton and football are the most popular sports. Indonesia is among the only five countries that have won the Thomas and Uber Cup, the world team championship of men's and women's badminton. Along with weightlifting, it is the sport that contributes the most to Indonesia's Olympic medal tally. Liga 1 is the country's premier football club league. On the international stage, Indonesia has experienced limited success despite being the first Asian team to participate in the FIFA World Cup in 1938 as Dutch East Indies. On the continental level, Indonesia won the bronze medal in the 1958 Asian Games. Indonesia's first appearance in the AFC Asian Cup was in 1996 and successfully qualified for the next three tournaments. They, however, failed to progress through the next stage in all occasions.

Other popular sports include boxing and basketball, which has a long history in Indonesia and was part of the first National Games (Pekan Olahraga Nasional, PON) in 1948. Some of the famous Indonesian boxers include Ellyas Pical, three times IBF Super flyweight champion; Nico Thomas, Muhammad Rachman, and Chris John. In motorsport, Rio Haryanto became the first Indonesian to compete in Formula One in 2016. Sepak takraw and karapan sapi (bull racing) in Madura are some examples of traditional sports in Indonesia. In areas with a history of tribal warfare, mock fighting contests are held, such as caci in Flores and pasola in Sumba. Pencak Silat is an Indonesian martial art and in 1987, became one of the sporting events in the Southeast Asian Games, with Indonesia appearing as one of the leading competitors. In Southeast Asia, Indonesia is one of the top sports powerhouses by winning the Southeast Asian Games ten times since 1977, most recently in 2011.

See also

Indonesia portal

Asia portal

Islands portal

List of Indonesia-related topics

Index of Indonesia-related articles

Outline of Indonesia

Notes

^ Sometimes the nationalistic name of the Unitary State of Republic of Indonesia (Negara Kesatuan Republik Indonesia, NKRI) is used.

^ Small but significant populations of ethnic Chinese, Indians, Europeans and Arabs are concentrated mostly in urban areas.

References

^ \"Pancasila\". U.S. Library of Congress. 3 February 2017. Archived from the original on 5 February 2017. Retrieved 5 February 2017.

^ Vickers 2005, p. 117. sfn error: multiple targets (2×): CITEREFVickers2005 (help)

^ a b c d Simons, Gary F.; Fennig, Charles D. \"Ethnologue: Languages of the World, Twenty-first edition\". SIL International. Archived from the original on 26 June 2019. Retrieved 20 September 2018.

^ a b Na'im, Akhsan; Syaputra, Hendry (2010). \"Nationality, Ethnicity, Religion, and Languages of Indonesians\" (PDF) (in Indonesian). Statistics Indonesia (BPS). Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 23 September 2015.

^ a b \"Statistik Umat Menurut Agama di Indonesia\" (in Indonesian). Kementerian Agama Republik Indonesia. 15 May 2018. Retrieved 13 June 2020.

^ \"UN Statistics\" (PDF). United Nations. 2005. Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 October 2007. Retrieved 31 October 2007.

^ \"\"World Population prospects – Population division\"\". population.un.org. United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 9 November 2019.

^ \"\"Overall total population\" – World Population Prospects: The 2019 Revision\" (xslx). population.un.org (custom data acquired via website). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 9 November 2019.

^ \"Jumlah dan Distribusi Penduduk\". BPS. May 2010. Retrieved 13 April 2018.

^ a b c d \"WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK (OCTOBER 2019)\". International Monetary Fund. Retrieved 20 October 2019.

^ \"GINI index (World Bank estimate) – Indonesia\". World Bank. Retrieved 22 March 2020.

^ \"Human Development Report 2019\" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 2019. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 December 2019. Retrieved 9 December 2019.

^ Robert Elson, The idea of Indonesia: A history (2008) pp 1–12

^ a b Tomascik, Tomas; Mah, Anmarie Janice; Nontji, Anugerah; Moosa, Mohammad Kasim (1996). The Ecology of the Indonesian Seas – Part One. Hong Kong: Periplus Editions. ISBN 978-962-593-078-7.

^ a b Anshory, Irfan (16 August 2004). \"The origin of Indonesia's name\" (in Indonesian). Pikiran Rakyat. Archived from the original on 15 December 2006. Retrieved 15 December 2006.

^ Earl 1850, p. 119.

^ Logan, James Richardson (1850). \"The Ethnology of the Indian Archipelago: Embracing Enquiries into the Continental Relations of the Indo-Pacific Islanders\". Journal of the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia. 4: 252–347.

^ Earl 1850, pp. 254, 277–278.

^ a b van der Kroef, Justus M (1951). \"The Term Indonesia: Its Origin and Usage\". Journal of the American Oriental Society. 71 (3): 166–171. doi:10.2307/595186. JSTOR 595186.

^ Brown, Colin (2003). A short history of Indonesia: the unlikely nation?. Allen Unwin. p. 13. ISBN 978-1-86508-838-9.

^ Pope, G.G. (1988). \"Recent advances in far eastern paleoanthropology\". Annual Review of Anthropology. 17: 43–77. doi:10.1146/annurev.an.17.100188.000355. cited in Whitten, T.; Soeriaatmadja, R.E.; Suraya, A.A. (1996). The Ecology of Java and Bali. Hong Kong: Periplus Editions. pp. 309–412.

^ Pope, G.G. (1983). \"Evidence on the age of the Asian Hominidae\". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 80 (16): 4988–4992. Bibcode:1983PNAS...80.4988P. doi:10.1073/pnas.80.16.4988. PMC 384173. PMID 6410399.

^ de Vos, J.P.; Sondaar, P.Y. (1994). \"Dating hominid sites in Indonesia\". Science. 266 (16): 4988–4992. Bibcode:1994Sci...266.1726D. doi:10.1126/science.7992059.

^ Gugliotta, Guy (July 2008). \"The Great Human Migration\". Smithsonian Maganize. Retrieved 21 August 2011.

^ a b Taylor 2003, pp. 5–7. sfn error: multiple targets (3×): CITEREFTaylor2003 (help)

^ Taylor 2003, pp. 8–9. sfn error: multiple targets (3×): CITEREFTaylor2003 (help)

^ Taylor 2003, pp. 15–18. sfn error: multiple targets (3×): CITEREFTaylor2003 (help)

^ Taylor 2003, pp. 3, 9–11, 13–5, 18–20, 22–3. sfn error: multiple targets (3×): CITEREFTaylor2003 (help)

^ Vickers 2005, pp. 18–20, 60, 133–4. sfn error: multiple targets (2×): CITEREFVickers2005 (help)

^ Taylor 2003, pp. 22–26 harvnb error: multiple targets (3×): CITEREFTaylor2003 (help); Ricklefs 1991, p. 3 harvnb error: multiple targets (2×): CITEREFRicklefs1991 (help)

^ Lewis, Peter (1982). \"The next great empire\". Futures. 14 (1): 47–61. doi:10.1016/0016-3287(82)90071-4.

^ Ricklefs 1991, pp. 3–14. sfn error: multiple targets (2×): CITEREFRicklefs1991 (help)

^ a b Ricklefs 1991, pp. 12–14. sfn error: multiple targets (2×): CITEREFRicklefs1991 (help)

^ Ricklefs 1991, pp. 22–24. sfn error: multiple targets (2×): CITEREFRicklefs1991 (help)

^ Ricklefs 1991, p. 24. sfn error: multiple targets (2×): CITEREFRicklefs1991 (help)

^ Schwarz 1994, pp. 3–4

^ Ricklefs (1991), p. 142

^ Friend (2003), p. 21

^ Friend, T. (2003). Indonesian Destinies. Harvard University Press. p. 21. ISBN 0-674-01137-6.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ Ricklefs, Merle Calvin (1991). A history of modern Indonesia since c. 1300 (2 ed.). Basingstoke; Stanford, CA: Palgrave; Stanford University Press. p. 61–147. ISBN 0-333-57690-X.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ Taylor, Jean Gelman (2003). Indonesia: Peoples and Histories. New Haven and London: Yale University Press. pp. 209-278. ISBN 0-300-10518-5.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ Vickers, Adrian (2005). A History of Modern Indonesia. Cambridge University Press. pp. 10-14. ISBN 0-521-54262-6.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ Ricklefs 1991 harvnb error: multiple targets (2×): CITEREFRicklefs1991 (help); Gert Oostindie; Bert Paasman (1998). \"Dutch Attitudes towards Colonial Empires, Indigenous Cultures, and Slaves\" (PDF). Eighteenth-Century Studies. 31 (3): 349–355. doi:10.1353/ecs.1998.0021. hdl:20.500.11755/c467167b-2084-413c-a3c7-f390f9b3a092.

^ \"Indonesia: World War II and the Struggle for Independence, 1942–50; The Japanese Occupation, 1942–45\". Library of Congress. November 1992. Archived from the original on 21 August 2013. Retrieved 11 February 2013.

^ Taylor 2003, p. 325 harvnb error: multiple targets (3×): CITEREFTaylor2003 (help); H. J. Van Mook (1949). \"Indonesia\". Royal Institute of International Affairs. 25 (3): 274–285. JSTOR 3016666.; Charles Bidien (5 December 1945). \"Independence the Issue\". Far Eastern Survey. 14 (24): 345–348. doi:10.2307/3023219. JSTOR 3023219.; Taylor, Jean Gelman (2003). Indonesia: Peoples and History. Yale University Press. p. 325. ISBN 0-300-10518-5.; Reid (1973), page 30

^ Friend 2003, p. 35. sfn error: multiple targets (3×): CITEREFFriend2003 (help)

^ Charles Bidien (5 December 1945). \"Independence the Issue\". Far Eastern Survey. 14 (24): 345–348. doi:10.2307/3023219. JSTOR 3023219.; \"Indonesian War of Independence\". Military. GlobalSecurity.org. Retrieved 11 December 2006.

^ Friend, T. (2003). Indonesian Destinies. Harvard University Press. p. 21, 23. ISBN 0-674-01137-6.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ Ricklefs, Merle Calvin (1991). A history of modern Indonesia since c. 1300 (2 ed.). Basingstoke; Stanford, CA: Palgrave; Stanford University Press. p. 211–213. ISBN 0-333-57690-X.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ Ricklefs 1991, pp. 237–280. sfn error: multiple targets (2×): CITEREFRicklefs1991 (help)

^ John Roosa and Joseph Nevins (5 November 2005). \"40 Years Later: The Mass Killings in Indonesia\". Counterpunch. Retrieved 12 November 2006.; Robert Cribb (2002). \"Unresolved Problems in the Indonesian Killings of 1965–1966\". Asian Survey. 42 (4): 550–563. doi:10.1525/as.2002.42.4.550.; \"Indonesia massacres: Declassified US files shed new light\". BBC. 17 October 2017. Archived from the original on 31 May 2018. Retrieved 19 September 2018.

^ Friend 2003, pp. 107–109. sfn error: multiple targets (3×): CITEREFFriend2003 (help)

^ Chris Hilton (writer and director) (2001). Shadowplay (Television documentary). Vagabond Films and Hilton Cordell Productions.

^ Ricklefs 1991, pp. 280–283, 284, 287–290. sfn error: multiple targets (2×): CITEREFRicklefs1991 (help)

^ John D. Legge (1968). \"General Suharto's New Order\". Royal Institute of International Affairs. 44 (1): 40–47. doi:10.2307/2613527. JSTOR 2613527.

^ Melvin, Jess (2018). The Army and the Indonesian Genocide: Mechanics of Mass Murder. Routledge. pp. 9–10. ISBN 978-1-138-57469-4.

^ Vickers 2005, p. 163. sfn error: multiple targets (2×): CITEREFVickers2005 (help)

^ David Slater, Geopolitics and the Post-Colonial: Rethinking North–South Relations, London: Blackwell, p. 70

^ Farid, Hilmar (2005). \"Indonesia's original sin: mass killings and capitalist expansion, 1965–66\". Inter-Asia Cultural Studies. 6 (1): 3–16. doi:10.1080/1462394042000326879.

^ Robinson, Geoffrey B. (2018). The Killing Season: A History of the Indonesian Massacres, 1965–66. Princeton University Press. p. 206. ISBN 978-1-4008-8886-3.

^ Delhaise, Philippe F (1998). Asia in Crisis: The Implosion of the Banking and Finance Systems. Willey. p. 123. ISBN 978-0-471-83450-2.

^ Jonathan Pincus and Rizal Ramli (1998). \"Indonesia: from showcase to basket case\". Cambridge Journal of Economics. 22 (6): 723–734. doi:10.1093/cje/22.6.723.

^ Ricklefs 1991. sfn error: multiple targets (2×): CITEREFRicklefs1991 (help)

^ Vickers 2005. sfn error: multiple targets (2×): CITEREFVickers2005 (help)

^ Schwarz 1994.

^ Burr, W. (6 December 2001). \"East Timor Revisited, Ford, Kissinger, and the Indonesian Invasion, 1975–76\". National Security Archive Electronic Briefing Book No. 62. National Security Archive, The George Washington University, Washington, DC. Archived from the original on 5 October 2019. Retrieved 17 September 2006.

^ \"Situation of human rights in East Timor\". Relief Web. 10 December 1999. Archived from the original on 20 November 2019. Retrieved 20 November 2019.

^ \"The Carter Center 2004 Indonesia Election Report\" (PDF). The Carter Center. Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 June 2007. Retrieved 14 June 2007.

^ Harsono, Andreas (May 2019). Race, Islam and Power: Ethnic and Religious Violence in Post-Suharto Indonesia. Monash University Publishing. ISBN 978-1-925835-09-0.

^ a b \"Indonesia signs Aceh peace deal\". The Guardian. 15 August 2005. Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved 20 November 2019.

^ Cochrane, Joe (22 July 2014). \"A Child of the Slum Rises as President of Indonesia\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 29 July 2014. Retrieved 22 July 2014.

^ Kuoni 1999, p. 88. sfn error: no target: CITEREFKuoni1999 (help)

^ \"16,000 Indonesian islands registered at UN\". The Jakarta Post. 21 August 2017. Archived from the original on 30 November 2018. Retrieved 3 December 2018.

^ a b c \"The World Factbook: Indonesia\". Central Intelligence Agency. 29 October 2018. Retrieved 11 November 2018.

^ \"Republic of Indonesia\". Microsoft Encarta. 2006. Archived from the original on 28 October 2009. Retrieved 1 November 2009.

^ \"Climate: Observations, projections and impacts\" (PDF). Met Office Hadley Centre. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 16 August 2017.

^ a b \"Indonesia and Climate Change: Current Status and Policies\" (PDF). World Bank. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 December 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2016.

^ Beck, Hylke E.; Zimmermann, Niklaus E.; McVicar, Tim R.; Vergopolan, Noemi; Berg, Alexis; Wood, Eric F. (30 October 2018). \"Present and future Köppen-Geiger climate classification maps at 1-km resolution\". Scientific Data. 5: 180214. Bibcode:2018NatSD...580214B. doi:10.1038/sdata.2018.214. PMC 6207062. PMID 30375988.

^ a b \"Indonesia: Volcano nation\". BBC. 5 November 2015. Archived from the original on 28 November 2017. Retrieved 28 November 2017.

^ Witton 2003, p. 38.

^ World and Its Peoples: Eastern and Southern Asia, Volume 10. Marshall Cavendish. 2007. p. 1306. ISBN 978-0-7614-7631-3.

^ Sylviane L. G. Lebon (January 2009). \"Volcanic activity and environment: Impacts on agriculture and use of geological data to improve recovery processes\" (PDF). University of Iceland. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 December 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2016.

^ Whitten, T; Soeriaatmadja, R. E.; Suraya A. A. (1996). The Ecology of Java and Bali. Hong Kong: Periplus Editions Ltd. pp. 95–97.

^ Bressan, David (11 August 2017). \"Early Humans May Have Lived Through A Supervolcano Eruption\". Forbes. Archived from the original on 11 August 2017. Retrieved 11 October 2017.

^ \"Tambora\". Volcano Discovery. 29 May 2016. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 20 December 2016.

^ Bressan, David (31 August 2016). \"The Eruption of Krakatoa Was the First Global Catastrophe\". Forbes. Archived from the original on 2 September 2016. Retrieved 2 September 2017.

^ Salikha, Adelaida (29 January 2018). \"Meet The 10 Megadiverse Countries In The World\". SEAsia. Archived from the original on 8 February 2018. Retrieved 8 February 2018.

^ Mumtazah, Hani (22 May 2003). \"Indonesia's Natural Wealth: The Right of a Nation and Her People\". Islam Online. Archived from the original on 17 October 2006. Retrieved 17 October 2006.

^ Whitten, T.; Henderson, G.; Mustafa, M. (1996). The Ecology of Sulawesi. Hong Kong: Periplus Editions Ltd. ISBN 978-962-593-075-6.; Monk, K.A.; Fretes, Y.; Reksodiharjo-Lilley, G. (1996). The Ecology of Nusa Tenggara and Maluku. Hong Kong: Periplus Editions Ltd. ISBN 978-962-593-076-3.

^ \"Indonesia\". InterKnowledge Corp. 6 October 2006. Archived from the original on 15 October 2006. Retrieved 15 October 2006.

^ \"Indonesia\" (in Norwegian). United Nations Association of Norway. 18 December 2014. Retrieved 19 December 2017.

^ Lambertini, Marco (10 April 2011). \"A Naturalist's Guide to the Tropics, excerpt\". The University of Chicago Press. Archived from the original on 5 February 2017. Retrieved 5 February 2017.

^ Tamindael, Otniel (17 May 2011). \"Coral reef destruction spells humanitarian disaster\". Antara News. Archived from the original on 25 May 2011. Retrieved 25 May 2011.

^ a b Severin, Tim (1997). The Spice Island Voyage: In Search of Wallace. Great Britain: Abacus Travel. ISBN 978-0-349-11040-0.

^ Wallace, A.R. (2000) . The Malay Archipelago. Periplus Editions. ISBN 978-962-593-645-1.

^ a b Miller, Jason R. (14 August 2007). \"Deforestation in Indonesia and the Orangutan Population\". TED Case Studies. Archived from the original on 11 August 2007. Retrieved 11 August 2007.

^ \"2020 Environmental Performance Index\" (PDF). Yale University. 2020. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 June 2020. Retrieved 9 June 2020.

^ McClanahan, Paige (11 September 2013). \"Can Indonesia increase palm oil output without destroying its forest?\". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 17 September 2013. Retrieved 17 September 2013.

^ Colchester, Marcus; Jiwan, Normal; Andiko, Martua Sirait; Firdaus, Asup Y.; Surambo, A.; Pane, Herbert (26 March 2012). \"Palm Oil and Land Acquisition in Indonesia: Implications for Local Communities and Indigenous People\" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 May 2012. Retrieved 31 May 2012.

^ Chrysolite, Hanny; Juliane, Reidinar; Chitra, Josefhine; Ge, Mengpin (4 October 2017). \"Evaluating Indonesia's Progress on its Climate Commitments\". World Resources Institute. Archived from the original on 5 October 2017. Retrieved 26 August 2018.

^ BirdLife International (2016). \"Leucopsar rothschildi\". IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. 2016: e.T22710912A94267053. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2016-3.RLTS.T22710912A94267053.en.

^ \"Extinction crisis escalates: Red List shows apes, corals, vultures, dolphins all in danger\". International Union for Conservation of Nature. 12 September 2007. Archived from the original on 16 October 2016. Retrieved 16 October 2016.

^ van Strien, N.J.; Steinmetz, R.; Manullang, B.; Sectionov, Han; K.H., Isnan; W., Rookmaaker; K., Sumardja; E., Khan; M.K.M. Ellis, S. (2008). \"Rhinoceros sondaicus\". IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. 2008: e.T19495A8925965. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2008.RLTS.T19495A8925965.en.

^ Overland, Indra et al. (2017) Impact of Climate Change on ASEAN International Affairs: Risk and Opportunity Multiplier, Norwegian Institute of International Affairs (NUPI) and Myanmar Institute of International and Strategic Studies (MISIS).

^ a b \"Climate Impact Map\". Climate Impact Lab. Retrieved 18 November 2018.

^ a b c d Case M, Ardiansyah F, Spector E (14 November 2007). \"Climate Change in Indonesia: Implications for Humans and Nature\" (PDF). WWF. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 February 2018. Retrieved 18 November 2018.

^ \"Report: Flooded Future: Global vulnerability to sea level rise worse than previously understood\". Climate Central. 29 October 2019. Archived from the original on 2 November 2019. Retrieved 5 November 2019.

^ Lin, Mayuri Mei; Hidayat, Rafki (13 August 2018). \"Jakarta, the fastest-sinking city in the world\". BBC. Archived from the original on 18 October 2018. Retrieved 19 November 2018.

^ \"Indonesia: Climate Risk and Adaptation Country Profile\" (PDF). World Bank. April 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 December 2017. Retrieved 18 November 2018.

^ a b c Dwi Harijanti, Susi; Lindsey, Tim (1 January 2006). \"Indonesia: General elections test the amended Constitution and the new Constitutional Court\". International Journal of Constitutional Law. 4 (1): 138–150. doi:10.1093/icon/moi055.

^ Ardiansyah, Fitrian; Marthen, Andri; Amalia, Nur (2015), Forest and land-use governance in a decentralized Indonesia, doi:10.17528/cifor/005695

^ (2002), The fourth Amendment of 1945 Indonesia Constitution, Chapter III – The Executive Power, Article 7.

^ Chapter II, Article 3, 3rd Clause of the 1945 Constitution.

^ a b c \"The 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia\" (PDF). International Labour Organization. Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 October 2017. Retrieved 11 October 2017.

^ a b Evans, Kevin (2019). \"Guide to the 2019 Indonesian Elections\" (PDF). Australia-Indonesia Centre. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 April 2019. Retrieved 30 July 2019.

^ Chapter VIIA, Article 22D of the 1945 Constitution.

^ Cammack, Mark E.; Feener, R. Michael (January 2012). \"The Islamic Legal System in Indonesia\" (PDF). Pacific Rim Law Policy Journal. Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 July 2017. Retrieved 1 July 2017.

^ Cochrane, Joe (15 March 2014). \"Governor of Jakarta Receives His Party's Nod for President\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 3 February 2017. Retrieved 3 February 2017.

^ Maboy, Olasri (4 August 2017). \"New election bill, new hope for democracy\". The Jakarta Post. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 5 October 2018.

^ \"House Agrees on Creation of Indonesia's 34th Province: 'North Kalimantan'\". The Jakarta Globe. 22 October 2012. Archived from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 16 August 2017.

^ Michelle Ann Miller (2004). \"The Nanggroe Aceh Darussalam law: a serious response to Acehnese separatism?\". Asian Ethnicity. 5 (3): 333–351. doi:10.1080/1463136042000259789.

^ \"Indonesia Law No. 5/1974 Concerning Basic Principles on Administration in the Region\" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 September 2007. Retrieved 28 September 2007. (146 KB)

^ \"Putting Indigenous Papuans as the Leading Subject of Development\" (in Indonesian). 17 September 2019. Archived from the original on 19 February 2020. Retrieved 15 February 2020.

^ \"DKI Jakarta, a City with a Provincial Status?\" (in Indonesian). Hukum Online. 26 June 2008. Archived from the original on 19 February 2020. Retrieved 16 February 2020.

^ \"Missions\" (in Indonesian). Ministry of Foreign Affairs – Republic of Indonesia. Retrieved 15 July 2019.

^ Péter, Klemensits; Márton, Fenyő (16 August 2017). \"The Foreign Policy of Indonesia In Light of President Jokowi's \"Visi-Misi\" Program\" (PDF). Pázmány Péter Catholic University. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 10 October 2017.

^ Bevins, Vincent (20 October 2017). \"What the United States Did in Indonesia\". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 28 April 2019. Retrieved 29 July 2019.

^ Muraviev, Alexey; Brown, Colin (December 2008). \"Strategic Realignment or Déjà vu? Russia-Indonesia Defence Cooperation in the Twenty-First Century\" (PDF). Australian National University. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 December 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2016.

^ Dahana, A. (1 October 2015). \"China and the Sept. 30 movement\". The Jakarta Post. Archived from the original on 5 October 2015. Retrieved 29 July 2019.

^ \"Indonesia – Foreign Policy\". U.S. Library of Congress. Archived from the original on 27 September 2006. Retrieved 27 September 2006.

^ Muhammad Zulfikar Rakhmat (11 March 2015). \"The Quiet Growth in Indonesia-Israel Relations\". The Diplomat. Archived from the original on 13 June 2018. Retrieved 8 September 2018.

^ Roberts, C.; Habir, A.; Sebastian, L. (25 February 2015). Indonesia's Ascent: Power, Leadership, and the Regional Order. ISBN 978-1-137-39741-6. Retrieved 19 December 2017.

^ Jensen, Fergus; Asmarini, Wilda. \"Net oil importer Indonesia leaves producer club OPEC, again\". Reuters. Archived from the original on 1 December 2016. Retrieved 1 December 2016.

^ Gutierrez, Natashya (22 August 2016). \"What happened when Indonesia 'withdrew' from the United Nations\". Rappler. Archived from the original on 1 November 2016. Retrieved 8 September 2018.

^ \"International Cooperation and Development\". European Commission. 17 January 2018. Retrieved 17 January 2018.

^ \"Indonesia\" (PDF). Development Initiatives. 2013. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 January 2014. Retrieved 28 July 2018.

^ Pierre van der Eng (2 December 2017). \"Why does Indonesia seem to prefer foreign aid from China?\". East Asia Forum. Archived from the original on 22 July 2018. Retrieved 28 July 2018.

^ Troath, Sian (28 February 2018). \"Shrugging Indonesia's inferiority complex\". Lowy Institute. Archived from the original on 8 September 2018. Retrieved 8 September 2018.

^ Chew, Amy (7 July 2002). \"Indonesia military regains ground\". CNN. Archived from the original on 14 November 2017. Retrieved 14 November 2017.

^ \"Indonesia: Military expenditure (% of GDP)\". World Bank. 2018. Retrieved 28 March 2020.

^ Jessica Vincentia Marpaung (17 June 2016). \"TNI's Gold Mine: Corruption and Military-Owned Businesses in Indonesia\". The Global Anti Corruption Blog. Archived from the original on 18 December 2017. Retrieved 18 December 2017.

^ Lowry, Bob (29 June 1999). \"Indonesian Armed Forces (Tentara Nasional Indonesia-TNI)\". Parliament of Australia. Archived from the original on 8 October 2017. Retrieved 29 July 2019.

^ Beets, Benjamin H. (2015). \"The Political Influence of the Military Before and After Democratic Transition: Experiences from Indonesia – An Assessment on Myanmar\" (PDF). Victoria University of Wellington. Retrieved 30 July 2018.

^ \"Indonesia Faces 3 Separatist Movements\". Los Angeles Times. 9 September 1990. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 10 October 2017.

^ Friend 2003, pp. 270–273, 477–480. sfn error: multiple targets (3×): CITEREFFriend2003 (help)

^ \"Indonesia flashpoints: Aceh\". BBC. 29 December 2005. Archived from the original on 22 August 2006. Retrieved 22 August 2006.

^ \"Papua: Answer to Frequently Asked Questions\" (PDF). International Crisis Group. 5 September 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 September 2006. Retrieved 18 September 2006.

^ Indonesia (1977), p. 39.

^ Budiardjo and Liong, p. 22.

^ \"Economy of Indonesia\". Indonesia Invesments. Archived from the original on 4 May 2017. Retrieved 4 May 2017.

^ \"Official G20\". G20. 2019. Retrieved 20 November 2019.

^ \"Policy Review: Is the Indonesian Government Debt still in a 'Safe Zone'?\". The Insider Stories. 21 February 2018. Archived from the original on 30 August 2018. Retrieved 30 August 2018.

^ \"Indonesia: Share of economic sectors in the gross domestic product (GDP) from 2008 to 2018\". Statista. December 2019. Retrieved 28 March 2020.

^ \"Indonesia: Distribution of employment by economic sector from 2009 to 2019\". Statista. December 2019. Retrieved 28 March 2020.

^ a b c Elias, Stephen; Noone, Clare (December 2011). \"The Growth and Development of the Indonesian Economy\" (PDF). Reserve Bank of Australia. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 December 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2016.

^ \"Indonesia – Poverty and Wealth\". Encyclopedia of the Nations. Archived from the original on 14 July 2011. Retrieved 14 July 2011.

^ Temple, Jonathan (15 August 2001). \"Growing into trouble: Indonesia after 1966\" (PDF). University of Bristol. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 December 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2016.

^ van der Eng, Pierre (4 February 2002). \"Indonesia's growth experience in the 20th century: Evidence, queries, guesses\" (PDF). Australian National University. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 10 October 2017.

^ \"World Economic Outlook Database: Report for Selected Countries and Subjects – Indonesia\". International Monetary Fund. October 2017. Retrieved 9 January 2018.

^ \"IMF Survey: Indonesia's Choice of Policy Mix Critical to Ongoing Growth\". International Monetary Fund. 28 July 2009. Archived from the original on 5 February 2017. Retrieved 5 February 2017.

^ \"Fitch Upgrades Indonesia's Rating to Investment Grade\". Jakarta Globe. 15 December 2011. Archived from the original on 8 January 2012. Retrieved 8 February 2012.

^ Musyaffa, Iqbal (9 January 2020). \"Indonesia's economy grew last year despite shortfalls\". Anadoly Agency. Archived from the original on 10 January 2020. Retrieved 28 March 2020.

^ \"Indonesia\". The Observatory of Economic Complexity. 2017. Retrieved 15 July 2019.

^ Workman, Daniel (26 December 2017). \"Indonesia's Top Trading Partners\". World's Top Exports. Archived from the original on 25 February 2018. Retrieved 25 February 2018.

^ Legge, John D. (April 1990). \"Review: Indonesia's Diversity Revisited\". Indonesia. 49 (49): 127–131. doi:10.2307/3351057. hdl:1813/53928. JSTOR 3351057.

^ del Olmo, Esmeralda (6 November 2017). \"Indonesian Transportation Sector Report 2017/2018\". EMIS. Archived from the original on 24 October 2018. Retrieved 24 October 2018.

^ \"Length of Road by Surface, 1957–2017 (Km)\" (in Indonesian). BPS. Retrieved 21 March 2020.

^ \"Koridor\" (in Indonesian). TransJakarta. Retrieved 15 August 2017.

^ Coca, Nithin (14 April 2019). \"At Last, Light Rail Comes to Jakarta\". Overture. Archived from the original on 22 November 2019. Retrieved 22 November 2019.

^ \"South-east Asia's first high-speed rail in Indonesia ready for construction: China Railway Corp\". The Straits Times. 2 July 2018. Archived from the original on 11 July 2018. Retrieved 26 September 2018.

^ \"Preliminary world airport traffic rankings released\". Airport Council International. 13 March 2019. Archived from the original on 4 October 2019. Retrieved 5 November 2019.

^ \"The 13,466-island problem\". The Economist. 27 February 2016. Retrieved 16 June 2017.

^ \"Overview: Indonesia\". U.S. Energy Information Administration. 7 October 2015. Retrieved 6 January 2020.

^ Budiman, Arief; Das, Kaushik; Mohammad, Azam; Tee Tan, Khoon; Tonby, Oliver (September 2014). \"Ten ideas to reshape Indonesia's energy sector\". McKinseyCompany. Archived from the original on 30 March 2015. Retrieved 30 March 2015.

^ a b Dolf Gielen, Deger Saygin and Jasper Rigter (March 2017). \"Renewable Energy Prospects: Indonesia\". International Renewable Energy Agency. Archived from the original on 12 November 2017. Retrieved 13 September 2018.

^ \"Power in Indonesia 2017\" (PDF). PwC. November 2017. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 September 2018. Retrieved 13 September 2018.

^ \"Statistik Ketenagalistrikan\" (PDF) (in Indonesian). Kementerian ESDM. September 2016. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 August 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2017.

^ Dr. Coyne Bellier (9 October 2007). \"Jatiluhur in Indonesia\" (in French). Planete-TP. Archived from the original on 9 November 2013. Retrieved 9 November 2013.

^ \"Indonesia seeking greater funding for RD\". Oxford Business Group. 29 August 2017. Archived from the original on 14 November 2017. Retrieved 25 August 2018.

^ Kasten, Michael. \"History of the Indonesian Pinisi\". Archived from the original on 9 December 2016. Retrieved 9 December 2016.

^ Sertori, Trisha (11 December 2014). \"Man of 1000 shoulders\". The Jakarta Post. Archived from the original on 20 March 2015. Retrieved 20 March 2015.

^ Rika Stevani, Louis (4 February 2017). \"INKA to Manufacture Trains for Export to Bangladesh, Sri Lanka\". Tempo. Archived from the original on 15 January 2018. Retrieved 15 January 2018.

^ Dwi Sutianto, Feby (5 February 2016). \"PTDI Ekspor 40 Unit Pesawat, Terlaris CN235\" (in Indonesian). detikFinance. Archived from the original on 15 August 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2017.

^ \"Habibie receives honorary doctorate\". The Jakarta Post. 30 January 2010. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 5 March 2016.

^ \"KF-X Fighter: Korea's Future Homegrown Jet\". Defense Industry Daily. 21 November 2017. Archived from the original on 23 November 2017. Retrieved 23 November 2017.

^ Mcelheny, Victor K. (8 July 1976). \"Indonesian Satellite to Be Launched\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2 August 2018. Retrieved 2 August 2018.

^ \"Planning and Development of Indonesia's Domestic Communications Satellite System PALAPA\". Online Journal of Space Communication. 2005. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015. Retrieved 18 May 2015.

^ \"Satellites by countries and organizations: Indonesia\". N2YO. Retrieved 20 November 2019.

^ Faris Sabilar Rusydi (17 June 2016). \"Lapan Target Luncurkan Roket Pengorbit Satelit Pada 2040\" (in Indonesian). LAPAN. Archived from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 16 August 2016.

^ Elliott, Mark (2003). Indonesia. Melbourne: Lonely Planet Publications Pty Ltd. pp. 211–215. ISBN 978-1-74059-154-6.

^ \"Indonesia\" (PDF). World Economic Forum. 4 September 2019. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 November 2019. Retrieved 5 November 2019.

^ \"Indonesia welcomed 15.8m foreign tourists last year: BPS\". The Jakarta Post. 1 February 2019. Archived from the original on 5 November 2019. Retrieved 5 November 2019.

^ Erwida, Maulia (6 January 2011). \"Tourism Ministry set to launch 'Wonderful Indonesia' campaign\". The Jakarta Post. Archived from the original on 12 March 2014. Retrieved 12 March 2014.

^ Doubilet, David (September 2007). \"Indonesia Undersea\". National Geographic. Archived from the original on 6 August 2009. Retrieved 6 August 2009.

^ a b Informasi Pariwisata Nusantara (Not for sale) (in Indonesian). Jakarta: Ministry of Tourism of the Republic of Indonesia. 2014.

^ \"Indonesia – Properties inscribed on the World Heritage List\". UNESCO. Retrieved 27 November 2016.

^ \"Fifty years needed to bring population growth to zero\". Waspada Online. 19 March 2011. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 10 May 2011.

^ \"Highest population, island\". Guinness World Records. Archived from the original on 6 June 2017. Retrieved 6 June 2017.

^ \"Census 2010\" (PDF) (in Indonesian). BPS. August 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 November 2010. Retrieved 13 November 2010.

^ \"Indonesia Population Projection\" (PDF) (in Indonesian). BPS. Retrieved 30 December 2016.

^ Nitisastro, Widjojo (2006). Population Trends in Indonesia. Equinox Publishing. p. 268. ISBN 9789793780436. Retrieved 5 September 2015 – via Google Books.

^ \"World Population Prospect: 2017 Revision\" (PDF). United Nations Department of Economics and Social Affairs – Population Division. 21 June 2017. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 December 2017. Retrieved 20 December 2017.

^ \"BBC: First contact with isolated tribes?\". Survival International. 25 January 2007. Archived from the original on 30 July 2017. Retrieved 30 July 2017.

^ \"Dinamika Pertumbuhan Penduduk Kota-Kota di Indonesia\" (in Indonesian). Indonesian Institute of Sciences. 6 August 2018. Archived from the original on 15 July 2019. Retrieved 31 August 2019.

^ \"Demographia World Urban Areas, 15th Annual Edition\" (PDF). Demographia. April 2019. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 February 2020.

^ Krisetya, Beltsazar (14 September 2016). \"Tapping the Indonesian Diaspora Potential\". Forum for International Studies. Archived from the original on 20 December 2017. Retrieved 20 December 2017.

^ a b \"An Overview of Indonesia\". Living in Indonesia: A Site for Expatriates. Archived from the original on 14 November 2017. Retrieved 14 November 2017.

^ Witton 2003, pp. 139, 181, 251, 435.

^ Dawson, B.; Gillow, J. (1994). The Traditional Architecture of Indonesia. London: Thames and Hudson Ltd. p. 7. ISBN 978-0-500-34132-2.

^ Kingsbury, Damien (2003). Autonomy and Disintegration in Indonesia. Routledge. p. 131. ISBN 0-415-29737-0.

^ Ricklefs 1991, p. 256. sfn error: multiple targets (2×): CITEREFRicklefs1991 (help)

^ \"The History of Indonesian\". Language Translation, Inc. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 12 January 2016.

^ Sneddon, James N. (April 2013). \"The Indonesian Language: Its History and Role in Modern Society\". University of South Wales Press Ltd. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 20 January 2018.

^ Anwar, Khaidir (1976). \"Minangkabau, Background of the main pioneers of modern standard Malay in Indonesia\". Retrieved 9 June 2017.

^ Amerl, Ivana (May 2006). \"Language interference: Indonesian and English\". MED Magazine. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 20 January 2018.

^ van Nimwegen, Nico (2002). \"The Demographic History of the Dutch in the East Indies\" (PDF). Nederlands Interdisciplinair Demografisch Instituut. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 July 2011. Retrieved 23 July 2011.

^ Baker (1998), p. 202.

^ Ammon (2005), p. 2017.

^ Booij (1999), p. 2

^ Chapter XA, Article 28E, 1st Clause of the 1945 Constitution.

^ Shah, Dian A. H. (2017). Constitutions, Religion and Politics in Asia: Indonesia, Malaysia and Sri Lanka. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-107-18334-6.

^ a b c Marshall, Paul (2018). \"The Ambiguities of Religious Freedom in Indonesia\". The Review of Faith International Affairs. 16 (1): 85–96. doi:10.1080/15570274.2018.1433588.

^ Ricklefs 2001, p. 379.

^ \"Sunni and Shia Muslims\". Pew Research Center. 27 January 2011. Archived from the original on 6 May 2017. Retrieved 6 May 2017.

^ Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor (2017). \"2016 Indonesia International Religious Freedom Report\" (PDF). U.S. Department of State. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 December 2017. Retrieved 19 December 2017.

^ Oey, Eric (1997). Bali (3rd ed.). Singapore: Periplus Editions. ISBN 978-962-593-028-2.

^ Suryadinata, Leo, ed. (2008). Ethnic Chinese in Contemporary Indonesia. ISBN 9789812308351.

^ a b Ooi, Keat Gin, ed. (2004). Southeast Asia: A historical encyclopedia, from Angkor Wat to East Timor (3 volume set). ABC-CLIO. p. 177. ISBN 978-1-57607-770-2.

^ Magnis-Suseno, F. 1981, Javanese Ethics and World-View: The Javanese Idea of the Good Life, PT Gramedia Pustaka Utama, Jakarta, 1997, pp. 15–18 ISBN 979-605-406-X, \"2003 International Religious Freedom Report\". U.S. Department of State. 2003. Retrieved 13 January 2012.

^ Jan Gonda, The Indian Religions in Pre-Islamic Indonesia and their survival in Bali, in Handbook of Oriental Studies. Section 3 Southeast Asia, Religions at Google Books

^ Darsa, Undang A. 2004. \"Kropak 406; Carita Parahyangan dan Fragmen Carita Parahyangan\", Makalah disampaikan dalam Kegiatan Bedah Naskah Kuna yang diselenggarakan oleh Balai Pengelolaan Museum Negeri Sri Baduga. Bandung-Jatinangor: Fakultas Sastra Universitas Padjadjaran: hlm. 1–23.

^ \"Buddhism in Indonesia\". Buddha Dharma Education Association. Buddha Dharma Education Association. 2005. Archived from the original on 10 May 2019. Retrieved 3 October 2006.

^ Martin, Richard C. (2004). Encyclopedia of Islam and the Muslim World. Vol. 2: M–Z. Macmillan.

^ Gerhard Bowering et al. (2012), The Princeton Encyclopedia of Islamic Political Thought, Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0-691-13484-0, pp. xvi

^ \"Indonesia – Bhineka Tunggal Ika\". Centre Universitaire d'Informatique. Archived from the original on 14 September 2006. Retrieved 20 October 2006.

^ Taufiq Tanasaldy, Regime Change and Ethnic Politics in Indonesia, Brill Academic, ISBN 978-90-04-26373-4

^ Gerhard Bowering et al., The Princeton Encyclopedia of Islamic Political Thought, Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0-691-13484-0

^ Ricklefs 1991, pp. 25, 26, 28. sfn error: multiple targets (2×): CITEREFRicklefs1991 (help)

^ \"About St Francis Xavier\". Catholic Archdiocese of Sydney. Archived from the original on 16 November 2012. Retrieved 5 July 2018.

^ Ricklefs 1991, pp. 28, 62. sfn error: multiple targets (2×): CITEREFRicklefs1991 (help)

^ Vickers 2005, p. 22. sfn error: multiple targets (2×): CITEREFVickers2005 (help)

^ Goh, Robbie B.H. (2005). Christianity in Southeast Asia. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. p. 80. ISBN 978-981-230-297-7.

^ \"Indonesia – Asia\". Reformed Online. Archived from the original on 5 December 2006. Retrieved 5 December 2006.

^ Dr. Ayala Klemperer-Markman. \"The Jewish Community in Indonesia\". Beit Hatfutsot. Archived from the original on 4 August 2019. Retrieved 12 March 2020.

^ Madjid, Nurcholish (1994). Islamic Roots of Modern Pluralism: Indonesian Experience. Studia Islamika: Indonesian Journal for Islamic Studies.

^ \"How religious commitment varies by country among people of all ages\". Pew Research Center. 13 June 2018. Archived from the original on 27 August 2018. Retrieved 23 November 2018.

^ Pearce, Jonathan MS (28 October 2018). \"Religion in Indonesia: An Insight\". Patheos. Archived from the original on 28 October 2018. Retrieved 23 November 2018.

^ \"Indonesian Holidays\". Living in Indonesia: A Site for Expatriates. 7 November 2019. Archived from the original on 14 September 2019. Retrieved 20 November 2019.

^ al-Samarrai, Samer; Cerdan-Infantes, Pedro (9 March 2013). \"Awakening Indonesia's Golden Generation: Extending Compulsory Education from 9 to 12 Years\". The World Bank Blog. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 10 October 2017.

^ Tan, Charlene (2014). \"Educative Tradition and Islamic Schools in Indonesia\" (PDF). Nanyang Technological University. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 March 2016. Retrieved 27 March 2016.

^ \"Indonesia: Education Expenditures\". UNESCO Institute for Statistics. 27 November 2016. Archived from the original on 21 August 2017. Retrieved 21 August 2017.

^ a b \"Is Indonesia Ready for International Branch Campuses?\". Inside Higher Ed. 29 May 2018. Archived from the original on 30 May 2018. Retrieved 18 November 2018.

^ \"Andalas University\". Global Business Guide Indonesia. Archived from the original on 8 November 2016. Retrieved 8 November 2016.

^ \"2018 Health SDG Profile: Indonesia\" (PDF). World Health Organization. July 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 December 2018. Retrieved 10 December 2018.

^ Thabrany, Hasbullah (2 January 2014). \"Birth of Indonesia's 'Medicare': Fasten your seatbelts\". The Jakarta Post. Archived from the original on 10 January 2014. Retrieved 26 August 2018.

^ \"The Republic of Indonesia Health System Review\" (PDF). Asia Pacific Observatory on Health Systems and Policies. 2017. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 March 2017. Retrieved 12 January 2018.

^ Nafsiah Mboi; Indra Murty Surbakti; Indang Trihandini; Iqbal Elyazar; Karen Houston Smith; et al. (2018). \"On the road to universal health care in Indonesia, 1990–2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016\". The Lancet. 392 (10147): 581–591. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30595-6. PMC 6099123. PMID 29961639.

^ Tadjoeddin, Mohammad Zulfan; Chowdury, Anis; Murshed, Syed Mansoob (October 2010). \"Routine Violence in Java, Indonesia: Neo-Malthusian and Social Justice Perspectives\" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 10 October 2017.

^ Upton, Stuart (January 2009). \"The impact of migration on the people of Papua, Indonesia: A historical demographic analysis\" (PDF). University of New South Wales. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 May 2017. Retrieved 10 May 2017.

^ \"Indonesia's Rising Divide\". World Bank. 7 December 2015. Archived from the original on 14 December 2016. Retrieved 14 December 2016.

^ \"Indonesia: The population of Chinese Indonesians and Chinese Christians in the Sulawesi provinces and the cities of Medan and Banda Aceh; incidents of violence and state protection available\" (PDF). Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada. 17 March 2010. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 10 October 2017.

^ Setijadi, Charlotte (17 March 2016). \"Ethnic Chinese in Contemporary Indonesia: Changing Identity Politics and the Paradox of Sinification\". ISEAS Perspective. 12 (2016). ISSN 2335-6677.

^ Walden, Max (May 2018). \"Tolerance and terror: Islam in Indonesia's Reformasi era\". Asian Correspondent. Archived from the original on 28 November 2019. Retrieved 28 November 2019.

^ Knight, Kyle (27 January 2016). \"Dispatches: LGBT Backlash in Indonesia\". Human Rights Watch. Archived from the original on 31 January 2017. Retrieved 31 January 2017.

^ \"Indonesia's Aceh: Two gay men sentenced to 85 lashes\". BBC. 17 May 2017. Archived from the original on 23 August 2017. Retrieved 7 April 2018.

^ Harvey, Adam (7 February 2018). \"UN rights chief warns 'intolerance' and political extremism making inroads in Indonesia\". ABC News. Archived from the original on 10 February 2018. Retrieved 21 April 2018.

^ a b Forshee, Jill (2006). \"Culture and Customs of Indonesia\" (PDF). Greenwood Press. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 10 October 2017.

^ Henley, David (2015). \"Indonesia\". The Wiley Blackwell Encyclopedia of Race, Ethnicity, and Nationalism. The Wiley Blackwell Encyclopedia of Race, Ethnicity, and Nationalism. John Wiley Sons, Inc. pp. 1–7. doi:10.1002/9781118663202.wberen460. ISBN 978-1-118-66320-2.

^ \"Indonesian Batik\". UNESCO. 2009. Retrieved 12 October 2014.

^ \"Indonesia – Intangible heritage, cultural sector\". UNESCO. Retrieved 14 December 2019.

^ \"Indonesian Arts and Crafts\". Living in Indonesia: A site for expats. Archived from the original on 27 December 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2016.

^ Forge, Anthony (1978). \"Balinese Traditional Paintings\" (PDF). The Australian Museum. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 20 December 2016.

^ \"Indonesian Culture; Arts and Tradition\". Embassy of Indonesia, Athens. 30 September 2010. Archived from the original on 26 December 2016. Retrieved 26 December 2016.

^ Violence and Serenity: Late Buddhist Sculpture from Indonesia ISBN 978-0-8248-2924-7 p. 113

^ Archaeology: Indonesian Perspective : R.P. Soejono's Festschrift ISBN 979-26-2499-6 pp. 298–299

^ \"Borobudur Temple Compounds\". UNESCO World Heritage Centre. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 10 October 2017.

^ Reimar Schefold; P. Nas; Gaudenz Domenig, eds. (2004). Indonesian Houses: Tradition and Transformation in Vernacular Architecture. NUS Press. p. 5. ISBN 978-9971-69-292-6.

^ Harnish, David; Rasmussen, Anne, eds. (2011). Divine Inspirations: Music and Islam in Indonesia. Oxford University Press.

^ \"'Keroncong': Freedom music from Portuguese descendants\". The Jakarta Post. 16 June 2011. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 23 September 2015.

^ Heryanto, Ariel (2008). Popular Culture in Indonesia: Fluid Identities in Post-Authoritarian Politics. Routledge.

^ \"Indonesia Tourism : The Dance and Theater in the Archipelago\". Indonesia Tourism. Archived from the original on 24 November 2010. Retrieved 24 November 2010.

^ Ziyi, Xia (16 November 2011). \"Cultural feast at ASEAN Fair\". Xinhua. Archived from the original on 19 December 2011.

^ a b Jill Forshee, Culture and customs of Indonesia, Greenwood Publishing Group: 2006: ISBN 0-313-33339-4. 237 pp.

^ \"Traditions, Wayang Wong Priangan: Dance Drama of West Java\" (PDF). 2004. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 10 October 2017.

^ José, Maceda. \"Southeast Asian arts\". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 20 April 2016. Retrieved 20 April 2016.

^ Dewangga, Kusuma (10 November 2013). \"Ketoprak: Javanese Folk Art (Part 1 of 2)\". Indonesia's Global Portal. Archived from the original on 13 November 2013. Retrieved 13 November 2013.

^ \"Indonesia – Theatre and Dance\". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 29 June 2016. Retrieved 29 June 2016.

^ Pauka, Kirstin (1998). \"The Daughters Take Over? Female Performers in Randai Theatre\". The Drama Review. 42 (1): 113–121. doi:10.1162/105420498760308706.

^ a b \"Randai (Indonesian folk theater form, uses silat)\". MIT Global Shakespeares.

^ Hatley, Barbara (13 November 2017). \"Review: Indonesian post-colonial theatre\". Inside Indonesia. Archived from the original on 21 December 2017. Retrieved 21 December 2017.

^ a b Sitorus, Rina (30 November 2017). \"The Reformation of Indonesian Film\". The Culture Trip. Archived from the original on 22 November 2019. Retrieved 22 November 2019.

^ \"Today Is the 97th Birthday of the Father of Indonesian Cinema. Here's What You Should Know About Usmar Ismail\". TIME. 20 March 2018. Archived from the original on 9 April 2019. Retrieved 20 November 2019.

^ a b Sen, Krishna (2006). Giecko, Anne Tereska (ed.). Contemporary Asian Cinema, Indonesia: Screening a Nation in the Post-New Order. Oxford/New York: Berg. pp. 96–107. ISBN 978-1-84520-237-8.

^ Kristianto, JB (2 July 2005). \"The Last 10 Years of Indonesia's Film Industry\". Kompas (in Indonesian). Archived from the original on 13 January 2008. Retrieved 13 October 2008.

^ Lee, Maggie (21 May 2017). \"World Notices Indonesian Film Resurgence\". Variety. Archived from the original on 24 November 2017. Retrieved 7 April 2018.

^ Shannon L., Smith; Lloyd Grayson J. (2001). Indonesia Today: Challenges of History. Melbourne: Singapore : Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. ISBN 978-0-7425-1761-5.

^ a b Frederick, William H; Worden, Robert L., eds. (2011). \"Indonesia: A country study\" (PDF). Library of Congress, Federal Research Division. Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 March 2015. Retrieved 15 March 2015. This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain.

^ Jennifer Yang Hui (2 December 2009). \"The Internet in Indonesia: Development and Impact of Radical Websites\" (PDF). Routledge. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 December 2017. Retrieved 12 December 2017.

^ \"Indonesia has 171 million internet users: Study\". The Jakarta Post. 19 May 2019. Archived from the original on 5 June 2019. Retrieved 26 July 2019.

^ Ai Lei Tao (25 April 2016). \"Indonesian internet users turn to smartphones to go online\". Computer Weekly. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 10 October 2017.

^ Templer, Robert (20 June 1999). \"Pramoedya\". Prospect. Archived from the original on 29 August 2019. Retrieved 29 August 2019.

^ Czermak, Karin; Delanghe, Philippe; Weng, Wei. \"Preserving intangible cultural heritage in Indonesia\" (PDF). SIL International. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 July 2007. Retrieved 9 July 2007.

^ Nursisto (2000). Ikhtisar Kesusastraan Indonesia: dari pantun, bidal, gurindam hingga puisi kontemporer : dari dongeng, hikayat, roman hingga cerita pendek dan novel. Adicita. ISBN 978-979-9246-28-8.

^ Joy Freidus, Alberta (1977). Sumatran Contributions to the Development of Indonesian Literature, 1920–1942. Asian Studies Program, University of Hawaii.

^ Seong Chee Tham (1981). Essays on Literature and Society in Southeast Asia: Political and Sociological Perspectives. Kent Ridge, Singapore: Singapore University Press. p. 99. ISBN 978-9971-69-036-6.

^ a b Boediman, Manneke (14 October 2015). \"An Introduction to the Literature of Indonesia, 2015 Frankfurt Book Fair's Guest of Honor\". Jakarta Globe. Archived from the original on 26 June 2020. Retrieved 26 June 2020.

^ Doughty, Louis (28 May 2016). \"'17,000 islands of imagination': discovering Indonesian literature\". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 29 May 2016. Retrieved 26 June 2020.

^ \"About Indonesian food\". Special Broadcasting Service. 13 May 2015. Archived from the original on 21 May 2015. Retrieved 21 May 2015.

^ Witton, Patrick (2002). World Food: Indonesia. Melbourne: Lonely Planet. ISBN 978-1-74059-009-9.

^ Compared to the infused flavors of Vietnamese and Thai food, flavors in Indonesia are kept relatively separate, simple and substantial. Brissendon, Rosemary (2003). South East Asian Food. Melbourne: Hardie Grant Books. ISBN 978-1-74066-013-6.

^ Natahadibrata, Nadya (10 February 2014). \"Celebratory rice cone dish to represent the archipelago\". The Jakarta Post. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 14 July 2014.

^ Cheung, Tim (12 July 2017). \"Your pick: World's 50 best foods\". CNN Travel. Archived from the original on 11 October 2017. Retrieved 11 October 2017.

^ Witton 2003, p. 103.

^ Alex Monnig, World Cup, 2013

^ \"History of Basketball in Indonesia\". National Basketball League Indonesia. Archived from the original on 8 September 2016. Retrieved 8 September 2016.

^ Widazulfia, Fahmiranti (3 May 2015). \"7 Boxing World Champions from Indonesia\" (in Indonesian). Good News from Indonesia. Archived from the original on 8 July 2015. Retrieved 8 July 2015.

^ Baldwin, Alan (18 February 2016). \"Haryanto becomes Indonesia's first F1 driver\". Reuters. Archived from the original on 27 December 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2016.

Bibliography

Earl, George SW (1850). \"On the Leading Characteristics of the Papuan, Australian and Malay-Polynesian Nations\". Journal of the Indian Archipelago and Eastern Asia (JIAEA). 4.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Frederick, William H.; Worden, Robert L., eds. (2011). Indonesia: A Country Study (6 ed.). Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, Federal Research Division. ISBN 978-0-8444-0790-6.

Friend, T. (2003). Indonesian Destinies. Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-01137-6.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Ricklefs, Merle Calvin (2001). A history of modern Indonesia since c. 1200 (3 ed.). Basingstoke; Stanford, CA: Palgrave; Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-4480-5.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Schwarz, A. (1994). A Nation in Waiting: Indonesia in the 1990s. Westview Press. ISBN 1-86373-635-2.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Taylor, Jean Gelman (2003). Indonesia: Peoples and Histories. New Haven and London: Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-10518-5.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Vickers, Adrian (2005). A History of Modern Indonesia. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-54262-6.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Witton, Patrick (2003). Indonesia. Melbourne: Lonely Planet. ISBN 978-1-74059-154-6.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

External links

Indonesiaat Wikipedia's sister projects

Definitions from Wiktionary

Media from Wikimedia Commons

News from Wikinews

Quotations from Wikiquote

Texts from Wikisource

Textbooks from Wikibooks

Travel guide from Wikivoyage

Resources from Wikiversity

Data from Wikidata

\"Indonesia\". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency.

Indonesia from the BBC News

Key Development Forecasts for Indonesia from International Futures

Government

Minister of The State Secretary (in Indonesian)

Statistics Indonesia

Chief of State and Cabinet Members

General

Indonesia UCB Libraries GovPubs

Indonesia at Curlie

Indonesia Encyclopædia Britannica

 Wikimedia Atlas of Indonesia

 Geographic data related to Indonesia at OpenStreetMap

Official Site of Indonesian Tourism

v

t

e

Indonesia articles

History 
Timeline

Hinduism-Buddhism era

Spread of Islam

VOC era (1603–1800)

Dutch East Indies (1800–1942)

Japanese occupation (1942–45)

National Revolution (1945–49)

Liberal democracy era (1950–57)

Guided Democracy (1957–65)

Transitional period (1965–66)

New Order (1966–98)

Reformasi (since 1998)

Geography

Cities

Biosphere reserves

Deforestation

Earthquakes

Environmental issues

Geology

Islands

Lakes

Mountains

Provincial highest points

National parks

Natural history
Fauna

Flora

Regions

Rivers

Volcanoes

Politics

Administrative divisions

Cabinet

Constitution

Elections

Foreign relations

Human rights

Law
enforcement

Military

National capital

Pancasila

People's Consultative Assembly

Police

Political parties

President (List)

Wawasan Nusantara

Economy

Agriculture

Automotive

Aviation

Banks

Energy

History

Science and technology

Stock Exchange

Telecommunications

Tourism

Transport

Water supply and sanitation

Society

Crime

Prostitution

Human trafficking

Culture 
Architecture (Rumah adat, Candi, Mosques, Colonial)

Art

Batik

Wayang

Cinema

Cuisine

Dance

Ikat

Heroes

Legends

Literature

Martial arts

Pencak silat

Media

Music

Gamelan

Properties

Public holidays

Sport

Video gaming

Demographics 
Education

Ethnic groups

Health
Healthcare

Homelessness

Languages

Nusantara

Religion

Women

Symbols 
Anthem

Costume

Emblem

Faunal emblems

Flag

Floral emblems

Garuda

Motto

Personification

Songs

Tree

Outline

Index

Category

Portal

Gallery

Atlas

Articles relating to Indonesia

v

t

e

Government of Indonesia

Executive Branch

National

Government

Elected officials 
President of Indonesia
list

Vice President of Indonesia
list

Cabinet (List) and

Ministries 
Coordinating Minister for Economic Affairs

Coordinating Minister for Human Development and Cultural Affairs

Coordinating Minister for Maritime Affairs

Coordinating Minister for Political, Legal, and Security Affairs

Agriculture

State Apparatus Utilization and Bureaucratic Reform

Communication and Information Technology

Cooperation and Small Medium Enterprises

Defense

Education and Culture

Energy and Mineral Resources

Environment and Forestry

Women Empowerment and Child Protection

Finance

Foreign Affairs

Health

Home Affairs

Industry

Land and Spatial Planning

Law and Human Rights

Manpower

Maritime Affairs and Fisheries

National Development Planning

Public Works and People's Housing

Religious Affairs

Research, Technology and Higher Education

Social Services

State Owned Enterprises

Ministry of State Secretariat

Tourism

Trade

Transportation

Villages, Underdeveloped Regions and Transmigration

Youth and Sports Affairs

Non-Ministrial

Government Agency 
National Archives of Indonesia

Creative Economy Agency

Geospatial Information Agency

State Intelligence

Maritime Security Agency

Civil Service

Population and Family Planning

Investment Coordination

Meteorology, Climatology and Geophysics

National Anti-Narcotics Agency

National Disaster Management

National Counter Terrorism Agency

Indonesian Workers Placement and Protection

Financial and Development Comptroller

Nuclear Energy Regulatory Agency

National Agency of Drug and Food Control

Technological Assessment and Application

National Development Planning

National Land Agency

Central Statistics

Search and Rescue

Indonesian Standardization Body

National Nuclear Energy Agency

State Administration Body

Indonesian Institute of Sciences

Government Procurement Policy

National Resilience

National Institute of Aeronautics and Space

State Signal and Cyber Agency

National Library of Indonesia

Non-Structural

Agency 
Corruption Eradication Commission

Financial Services Authority

Financial Transaction Reports and Analysis Center

General Elections Commission

National Team for Transportation Safety and Security

Local

Government 
Governor

Regent or Mayor

Legislative Branch

National

Government 
People's Consultative Assembly

People's Representative Council

Regional Representative Council

Local

Government 
Regional People's Representative Council

Judicial Branch 
Supreme Court

Constitutional Court

Judicial Commission

Other Government

Agencies 
Bank Indonesia

Military and

Police 
Indonesian National Armed Forces
Air Force

Army

Marine Corps

Navy

Indonesian National Police
Mobile Brigade Corps

Municipal Police

 Indonesia portal

 WikiProject

 Commons

 Category

v

t

e

Provinces of Indonesia

Capital: Jakarta

Sumatra 
 Aceh

 Bangka Belitung Islands

 Bengkulu

 Jambi

 Lampung

 North Sumatra

 Riau

 Riau Islands

 South Sumatra

 West Sumatra

Java 
 Banten

 Central Java

 East Java

 Jakarta

 West Java

 Yogyakarta

Kalimantan 
 Central Kalimantan

 East Kalimantan

 North Kalimantan

 South Kalimantan

 West Kalimantan

Lesser Sunda 
 Bali

 East Nusa Tenggara

 West Nusa Tenggara

Sulawesi 
 Central Sulawesi

 Gorontalo

 North Sulawesi

 Southeast Sulawesi

 South Sulawesi

 West Sulawesi

Maluku 
 Maluku

 North Maluku

Papua 
 Papua

 West Papua

Lists by

GRP per capita

HDI

ISO codes

v

t

e

Countries and territories of Oceania

Sovereign states

Entire 
Australia

Federated States of Micronesia

Fiji

Kiribati

Marshall Islands

Nauru

New Zealand

Palau

Papua New Guinea

Samoa

Solomon Islands

Tonga

Tuvalu

Vanuatu

In part 
Chile
Easter Island

Juan Fernández Islands

Indonesia
West Papua

Papua

Japan
Bonin Islands

Volcano Islands

Minami-Tori-shima

United States
Hawaii

Palmyra Atoll

Associated states

of New Zealand

Niue

Cook Islands

Dependencies and

other territories

Australia 
Ashmore and Cartier Islands

Coral Sea Islands

Norfolk Island

United States 
American Samoa

Baker Island

Guam

Howland Island

Jarvis Island

Johnston Atoll

Kingman Reef

Midway Atoll

Northern Mariana Islands

Wake Island

New Zealand 
Tokelau

France 
French Polynesia

New Caledonia

Wallis and Futuna

United Kingdom 
Pitcairn Islands

v

t

e

Countries and dependencies of Asia

Sovereign states 
Afghanistan

Armenia

Azerbaijan

Bahrain

Bangladesh

Bhutan

Brunei

Cambodia

China

Cyprus

East Timor (Timor-Leste)

Egypt

Georgia

India

Indonesia

Iran

Iraq

Israel

Japan

Jordan

Kazakhstan

North Korea

South Korea

Kuwait

Kyrgyzstan

Laos

Lebanon

Malaysia

Maldives

Mongolia

Myanmar

Nepal

Oman

Pakistan

Philippines

Qatar

Russia

Saudi Arabia

Singapore

Sri Lanka

Syria

Tajikistan

Thailand

Turkey

Turkmenistan

United Arab Emirates

Uzbekistan

Vietnam

Yemen

States with limited recognition 
Abkhazia

Artsakh

Northern Cyprus

Palestine

South Ossetia

Taiwan

Dependencies and special

administrative regions

Australia 
Christmas Island

Cocos (Keeling) Islands

China 
Hong Kong

Macau

United Kingdom 
Akrotiri and Dhekelia

British Indian Ocean Territory

 Book

 Category

 Asia portal

v

t

e

Association of Southeast Asian Nations

Politics

Charter

Customs union

Founding document

Organisations

Secretary General

Treaty of Amity and Cooperation

Visa policies

Symbols 
Anthem

Emblem

Flag

Hymn

Members

Brunei

Cambodia

Indonesia

Laos

Malaysia

Myanmar

Philippines

Singapore

Thailand

Vietnam

Observers 
Papua New Guinea
status

East Timor
status

Events

Summits 
ASEAN Summit
2017

East Asia Summit

ASEAN–Republic of Korea Commemorative Summit

ASEAN–India Commemorative Summit

Other 
ASEAN Plus Three

ASEAN Regional Forum

Asia–Europe Meeting

Athletics 
SEA Games

University Games

School Games

Para Games

Football Federation
Football Championship

Armies Rifle Meet

ASEAN countries in sporting events

Economy 
Asian Monetary Unit

Chiang Mai Initiative

Comprehensive Economic Partnership for East Asia

Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership

ASEAN Free Trade Area

ASEAN–China Free Trade Area

ASEAN–India Free Trade Area

ASEAN–Australia Development Cooperation Program

Initiatives 
Centre for Biodiversity

Disaster Relief Exercise

Smart Cities Network

Commissions
Human Rights
ASEAN Human Rights Declaration

Rights of Women

Other 
Common Time

\"ASEAN Rise\"

EU relations

Outstanding Scientist and Technologist Award

Lists
Countries by GDP

Countries by HDI

Cities by population

v

t

e

G20 major economies

 Argentina

 Australia

 Brazil

 Canada

 China

 European Union

 France

 Germany

 India

 Indonesia

 Italy

 Japan

 Mexico

 Russia

 Saudi Arabia

 South Africa

 Republic of Korea

 Turkey

 United Kingdom

 United States

v

t

e

Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC)

Members 
Afghanistan

Albania

Algeria

Azerbaijan

Bahrain

Bangladesh

Benin

Burkina Faso

Brunei

Cameroon

Chad

Comoros

Djibouti

Egypt

Gabon

Gambia

Guinea

Guinea-Bissau

Guyana

Indonesia

Iran

Iraq

Ivory Coast

Jordan

Kuwait

Kazakhstan

Kyrgyzstan

Lebanon

Libya

Malaysia

Maldives

Mali

Mauritania

Morocco

Mozambique

Niger

Nigeria

Oman

Pakistan

Palestine

Qatar

Saudi Arabia

Senegal

Sierra Leone

Somalia

Sudan

Suriname

Tajikistan

Turkey

Tunisia

Togo

Turkmenistan

Uganda

Uzbekistan

United Arab Emirates

Yemen

Suspended 
Syria

Observers

Countries

and territories

Bosnia and Herzegovina

Central African Republic

Northern Cyprus1

Russia

Thailand

Muslim

communities

Moro National Liberation Front

International

organizations

Economic Cooperation Organization

African Union

Arab League

Non-Aligned Movement

United Nations

1 As the \"Turkish Cypriot State\".

v

t

e

Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)

Nations 
Australia

Brunei

Canada

Chile

China

Hong Kong¹

Indonesia

Japan

South Korea

Malaysia

Mexico

New Zealand

Papua New Guinea

Peru

Philippines

Russia

Singapore

Chinese Taipei²

Thailand

United States

Vietnam

Summits 
1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

Other 
APEC Business Travel Card

APEC blue

APEC Climate Center

APEC Sculpture Garden

APEC Youth Science Festival

1. A special administrative region of China, participates as \"Hong Kong, China\"; 2. Officially the Republic of China, as known as Taiwan, participates as \"Chinese Taipei\"

v

t

e

Pacific Islands Forum (PIF)

Members 
Australia

Cook Islands

Fiji

French Polynesia

Kiribati

Marshall Islands

Micronesia

Nauru

New Zealand

Niue

Palau

Papua New Guinea

New Caledonia

Samoa

Solomon Islands

Tonga

Tuvalu

Vanuatu

Associate members 
Tokelau

Observers 
American Samoa

East Timor

Guam

Northern Mariana Islands

Wallis and Futuna

Observer Organisations 
African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States

Asian Development Bank

Commonwealth of Nations

International Organization for Migration

United Nations

Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC)

World Bank

Dialogue partners 
Canada

China

Cuba

European Union

France

Germany

India

Indonesia

Italy

Japan

Korea

Malaysia

Philippines

Spain

Thailand

Turkey

United Kingdom

United States

Meetings 
45th

Authority control 
BNF: cb15323043s (data)

GND: 4026761-1

HDS: 003408

ISNI: 0000 0004 0392 1382

LCCN: n80083633

MusicBrainz: d3a68bd0-7419-3f99-a5bd-204d6e057089

NARA: 10035695

NDL: 00871922

NKC: ge129385

NLI: 000980148

SUDOC: 026385864

VIAF: 125405737

 WorldCat Identities: lccn-n80083633

"

