"Religious organisation

International Society for Krishna Consciousness

From top (left to right): Main gate of ISKCON Mayapur, ISKCON Temple in Vrindavan, ISKON temple in Bengaluru and Bhaktivedanta College in Belgium

Abbreviation ISKCON

Motto Krsnas Tu Bhagavan Svayam

Formation 13 July 1966 (54 years ago) (1966-07-13) New York City, US

Founder A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada

Type Religious organisation

Legal status Foundation

Headquarters Mayapur, West Bengal, India

Location 850 temples, ecovillages and centres

Coordinates 23°16′N 88°14′E / 23.26°N 88.23°E / 23.26; 88.23Coordinates: 23°16′N 88°14′E / 23.26°N 88.23°E / 23.26; 88.23

Area served

Worldwide

Main organ

Governing Body Commission

Affiliations Gaudiya Vaishnavism

Website iskcon.org

 Part of a series on

Vaishnavism

Supreme deity

Vishnu (Narayana) / Krishna / Rama / Vithoba

Important deities

Dashavatara

Matsya

Kurma

Varaha

Narasimha

Vamana

Parasurama

Rama

Balarama

Krishna

Buddha

Kalki

Other Avatars

Nara-Narayana

Hayagriva

Dhanvantari

Prithu

Mohini

Venkateswara

Balarama

Consorts

Lakshmi

Bhūmi

Sita

Radha

Rukmini

Alamelu

Nila

Related

Garuda

Hanuman

Shesha

Holy scriptures

Vedas

Upanishads

Agamas

Brahma Sutras

Bhagavad Gita

Mahabharata

Ramayana

Harivamsa

Divya Prabandha

Gita Govinda

Puranas

Vishnu

Bhagavata

Naradiya

Garuda

Padma

Agni

Sampradayas

Sri (Vishishtadvaita)

Brahma (Dvaita, Acintyabhedabheda)

Rudra (Shuddhadvaita)

Kumara (Dvaitadvaita)

Teachers–acharyas

Nathamuni

Nammalvar

Yamunacharya

Ramanuja

Pillai Lokacharya

Vedanta Desika

Manavala Mamunigal

Nimbarka

Madhva

Dnyaneshwar

Vishnuswami

Vidyapati

Vallabha

Ramananda

Kabir

Dadu Dayal

Sankardev

Madhavdev

Chaitanya

Jiva Goswami

Harivansh

Related traditions

Bhagavatism

Vaikhanasas

Pancharatra

Thenkalais

Vadakalais
Munitraya

Varkari

Mahanubhava

Haridasa

Sahajiya
Baul

Pushtimarg

Ekasarana

Gaudiya
ISKCON

Radha-vallabha

Ramanandi

Kapadi

Balmiki

Kabir panth

Dadu panth

Pranami

Swaminarayan

 Hinduism portal

v

t

e

The International Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON), known colloquially as the Hare Krishna movement or Hare Krishnas, is a Gaudiya Vaishnava Hindu religious organisation. ISKCON was founded in 1966 in New York City by A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada. Its core beliefs are based on the Hindu scriptures, particularly the Bhagavad Gita and the Bhagavata Purana, and the Gaudiya Vaishnava tradition, which has had adherents in India since the late 15th century and American and European devotees since the early 1900s.

The organization was formed to spread the practice of Bhakti yoga, the practice of love of God in which those involved (bhaktas) dedicate their thoughts and actions towards pleasing Krishna, the Supreme Lord. Its most rapid expansions in membership as of 2007 have been within India and especially after the collapse of the Soviet Union, in Russia, Ukraine, and the rest of the ex-Soviet aligned states of Eastern Europe and Central Asia.

Today, it has around a million congregational members worldwide as of June 2019.

Contents

1 History and belief

2 Practices

2.1 Four Regulative Principles

2.2 Festivals

2.3 Preaching

3 Centres worldwide

3.1 India

3.2 Europe

3.3 North and South America

3.4 Asia, Africa and Australia

4 Kirtan and music influence

5 Vegetarianism

6 Charitable projects

6.1 Cow Protection and ISCOWP

6.2 ISKCON Tribal Care Trust

6.3 Food For Life Global

7 Management structure

7.1 Succession of teachings

8 Specialty programming

8.1 Youth Ministry

8.2 ISKCON Vaishnavi Ministry

8.3 ISKCON Child Protection Office

8.4 Significant Organizations

9 Relationship with other Religions

10 Persecution

11 In popular culture

12 See also

13 References

14 Sources

15 External links

History and belief

Further information: Achintya Bheda Abheda and Gaudiya Vaishnavism

Pancha-Tattva deities: Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, Nityananda, Advaita Acharya, Gadadhara and Srivasa, installed in a Gaudiya Vaishnava temple

ISKCON's Bhajan during Navratri Golu at Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India

ISKCON devotees follow a disciplic line of Gaudiya Bhagavata Vaishnavas and are the largest branch of Gaudiya Vaishnavism. Vaishnavism means 'worship of Vishnu', and Gauḍa refers to the area where this particular branch of Vaishnavism originated, in the Gauda region of West Bengal. Gaudiya Vaishnavism has had a following in India, especially West Bengal and Odisha, for the past five hundred years. Gaudiya Vaishnavism was founded by the saint Chaitanya Mahaprabhu who rapidly spread his form of ecstatic bhakti (devotion) throughout Bengal. He established Sankirtan, the practice of publicly expressing devotion to
Lord Krishna, the Supreme God, through dance and song. This form of communal worship responded to rigid caste structures by engaging all people in worship regardless of caste and creed. Chaitanya emphasized chanting the Hare Krishna Mahamantra (the 'great mantra'). He is considered by Gaudiya Vaishnavas to be an incarnation of Krishna himself.

Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada brought Chaitanya's Gaudiya Vaishnavism to the West in 1965. At 69 years old, he landed in New York without any money. Instead of preaching to New York's elite, he tapped into the 1960s countercultural spirit by preaching and chanting in public parks and attracting hippies and the youth. His movement, then known as the "Hare Krishna Movement", grew even larger when he relocated to San Francisco a year later. When it spread to England, it gained publicity and financial backing from the Beatle George Harrison. He recorded several tracks with the Hare Krishnas and included the Mahamantra in his hit track "My Sweet Lord". The first Hare Krishna commune, New Vrindavan (West Virginia), was established by Prabhupada in 1968. Since then, ISKCON has established more than 600 centers all over the world and has millions of followers.

Key to the spread of Gaudiya Vaishnava theology in the Western world was Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada's extensive writings and translations, including the Bhagavad Gita As It Is, Srimad Bhagavatam (Bhagavata Purana), Chaitanya Charitamrita, and other scriptures. These works are now available in more than seventy languages and serve as the scriptures of ISKCON.

ISKCON describes Krishna as the source of all the avatars of God. Thus ISKCON devotees worship Krishna as the highest form of God, svayam bhagavan, and often refer to him as the Supreme Personality of Godhead in writing, which was a phrase coined by Prabhupada in his books on the subject. To devotees, Radha represents Krishna's divine female counterpart, the original spiritual potency, and the embodiment of divine love. The individual soul is an eternal personal identity which does not ultimately merge into a non-dual consciousness (Brahman) as believed by the monistic (Advaita) schools of Hinduism. Prabhupada most frequently offers Sanatana-dharma and Varnashrama dharma as more accurate names for the religious system which accepts Vedic authority. It is a monotheistic tradition which has its roots in the theistic Vedanta traditions.

Practices

Statue of Srila Prabhupada founder of ISKCON.

Hare Krishna Ratha-Yatra through the streets of Boston, Massachusetts.

The most famous and publicly recognizable ISKCON practice is kirtan, a congregational chanting or singing of the Hare Krishna mantra. It's both a way to express devotion to God and a way to attract newcomers to the movement. Devotees gather in public, in streets and parks, to sing the mantra accompanied by instruments like the mridanga, hand cymbals, and the harmonium. During the 1970s ISKCON entered the public eye because of this practice. Devotees would sing, distribute books, and proselytize in airports and other public areas. Sankirtan continues throughout the world today, but in a less confrontational manner.

Other important religious practice within ISKCON and Gaudiya Vaishnavism is japa, or the meditative practice of repeatedly chanting the names of Krishna on a rosary. It's considered the only way for salvation for people in the current age. Prabhupada established a standard for initiated devotees to chant sixteen rounds of the Hare Krishna mantra a day. Each round requires chanting the mahamantra 108 times on prayer beads, with sixteen rounds being 1728 repetitions and taking around two hours.

Another important practice in ISKCON is arati (also called puja). In arati, devotees offer water, incense, a fire lamp, and flowers to a murti, a sacred statue or image of Krishna. This is accompanied by prayers and devotional songs called bhajans. Practitioners may perform aarti at their own home or congregate at a temple to join in the ceremony. Along with this worship, devotees will bathe the murti, dress it, offer it food, and even put it to sleep. By doing arati and serving the murti, devotees aim to deepen their relationship with Krishna.

ISKCON devotees meet regularly (typically on Sunday at a program known as the Sunday Feast) to worship deities, listen to discourses by senior devotees, participate in kirtan and eat sanctified offered food.

Four Regulative Principles

During initiation (diksha) ISKCON devotees vow to follow four basic rules and regulations, They are-

to follow a lacto-vegetarian diet

not to consume any intoxicants (alcohol, cigarettes or drugs)

not to gamble

not to engage in 'illicit sex'.

Festivals

Besides weekly gatherings, devotees within the ISKCON movement celebrate a diverse array of Hindu festivals, including Janmashtami, Radhashtami, Diwali, Gaura Purnima, Ekadasi, Holi, Rama Navami and Gita Jayanti.

The Ratha Yatra Festival of Chariots is an annual parade whereby devotees chant and dance on the street, pulling a chariot with the deities of Lord Jagannatha, Baladeva, and Subhadra behind them. This public procession is typically followed by performances and free vegetarian food.

Preaching

ISKCON advocates preaching. Members try to spread Krishna consciousness primarily by singing the Hare Krishna mantra in public places and by selling books written by the founder.

A study conducted by E. Burke Rochford Jr. at the University of California found that there are four types of contact between those in ISKCON and prospective members. Those are individually motivated contact, contact made with members in public areas, contact made through personal connections, and contact with sympathizers of the movement who strongly encourage people to join.

According to the doctrine of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, one does not need to be born in a Hindu family to take up the practice.
There are ISKCON communities around the world with schools, restaurants, and farms.

Centres worldwide

A Russian Hare Krishna girl

India

India has the highest density of ISKCON centres in the world, with over 150 temples, 12 state-recognized educational institutions, 25 affiliated and non-affiliated restaurants, and a number of tourist and pilgrimage hotels. It is also home to Govardhan Eco-Village, an ayurvedic treatment and retreat centre near Mumbai. ISKCON India has been known to espouse more traditional orthodox Vedic values than its Western counterparts.

Shri Mayapur Chandroya Mandir Temple of the Vedic Planetarium, Mayapur

Set to be completed in 2022, the Sri Mayapur Chandroya Mandir in West Bengal is built in the birthplace of Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, the founder of the Gaudiya-Vaishnava lineage of Hinduism. The temple itself currently sits at 425 000 square feet and is 340 feet tall, and is surrounded by accompanying lodges, shops, residences, educational centres, and gardens. The project cost an estimated $75 million, with its’ major investor being Alfred B. Ford, the great-grandson of Henry Ford. The complex ‘s main attraction is a planetarium based on Vedic cosmology as well as exhibitions about the Vedic arts, sciences and culture as described in the Srimad Bhagvatam. After completion, the temple will be the biggest in the world, second to Angkor Wat in Cambodia.

Sri Sri Krishna Balarama Mandir, Vrindavan

Located in the Raman Reti area of Vrindavan, Uttar Pradesh, the temple was built in the original village where the spiritual figures Krishna and Balarama are said to have resided in the Vedic period of Indian history. It is built in close proximity to other holy sites such as the village of Gokul, Govardhana Hill, the Mathura palace, and various holy lakes. As a result, ISKCON Vrindavan is a common pilgrimage site for followers of the Krishna Conscious movement. The complex is home to a guesthouse, a museum, gift shops, a restaurant, a bakery, a broadcast studio as well as a marble temple hall. The temple is also affiliated with the Vrindavan Institute of Higher Education.

Vrindavan Chandrodaya Mandir, Bangalore

One of the ISKCON temples in Bengaluru, India.

Overseen by ISKCON Bangalore, the VCM is currently under construction and slated to be the tallest religious monument in the world, featuring a helipad, theme park, museum, accommodation, wooded and park area and temple.

Sri Sri Parthasarathi Mandir, New Delhi

The temple complex houses the Glory of India Vedic Cultural Centre which is a set of interactive educational exhibits, as well as the world’s largest printed religious book, known as the “Astounding Bhagavad Gita”.

Sri Sri Radha Madhav Sundar Mandir, Siliguri

This temple is located at Siliguri and known as Gupta Nabadweep Dham.

Europe

There are over 135 ISKCON-affiliated temples and cultural centres in Europe. The ISKCON movement in Europe is home to a number of rural and farming communities, including Nueva Vrajamandala in Spain, La Nouvelle Mayapura in France and Villa Vrindavan in Italy.

Radhadesh, Belgium

The Radhadesh temple in Durbuy, Belgium is home to Bhaktivedanta College, which opened in 2002 to provide ministerial and spiritual education for students, offering degrees and certificates online and on campus in Vaishnava theology externally validated by the University of Chester.

Bhaktivedanta College in Belgium

The Radhadesh temple is also home to Radhadesh Mellows, an annual kirtan retreat.

Bhaktivedanta Manor, Watford

A landscaped property featuring gardens, lakes, a school, farm, numerous temple and housing buildings, accommodations and a bakery, the property for Bhaktivedanta Manor was donated by George Harrison of the Beatles and is on the National Heritage List for England. The houses on the property, including the temple, are built in the mock-Tudor mansion style of the 1800s.

Bhaktivedanta Manor is also home to the London College of Vedic Studies, and is the birthplace of the Avanti Schools Trust, a sponsor of state-funded primary and secondary schools that provides both non-denominational and Hindu-faith education throughout the UK.

Demographically, devotees in Europe are majority ethnic Europeans. An exception can be made with the demographics of devotees in the United Kingdom, which caters to the Indian immigrant population, mirroring the demographics of most North American centres.

North and South America

There are 56 formally affiliated ISKCON centres in the United States. Notable centres include New Raman Reti in Alachua, FL and The Radha Kalachandji Temple in Dallas, TX. Hare Krishna-affiliated full-time communities include New Vrindaban in West Virginia, and Gita Nagari Eco Farm and Sanctuary in Pennsylvania. There are various other centres in the United States that promote Krishna Conscious culture without being formally affiliated with ISKCON, including The Bhakti Center in New York City. The ISKCON Dallas temple is affiliated with the nearby TKG Academy, which provides private school academic education with additional Vedic-based courses.

There are 12 ISKCON centres in Canada, including the self-sustaining Saranagati Eco Village in BC. There are 5 formally affiliated ISKCON centres in Mexico.

There are 60 affiliated ISKCON temples in South America, with most congregations located in Argentina and Brazil. There are also a number of devotee-run farming communities throughout Latin America.

Asia, Africa and Australia

Asia is home to over 80 ISKCON affiliated centres, with most being located in Indonesia, Malaysia, and the Philippines. There are 31 additional centres in Russia, as Vaishnava Hinduism represents one of the largest denominations of faith in the country.

There are 69 affiliated ISKCON centres in Africa, four of which are rural farming communities and three of which are educational centres. ISKCON Durban hosts the world's largest Ratha Yatra Chariot Festival outside of India.

There are six ISKCON centres including one farming village in Australia and four temple centres in New Zealand. The Hare Krishna Temple in Christchurch, New Zealand, distributed free meals to mourners and the local Muslim community after a mosque shooting in March 2019.

Kirtan and music influence

The practice of mantra meditation, also known as kirtan, is prominent in the ISKCON movement. Dedicated kirtan festivals are held annually around the world, such as the Sadhu Sanga Retreat in Boone, North Carolina, Kirtan 50 in Dallas, Texas, and Radhadesh Mellows, in Durbuy, Belgium. Notable kirtaneers include Jahnavi Harrison, Gaura Vani, and the Mayapuris, who have all released kirtan albums. Kirtan sessions are also held outside of temple settings, including at local university “Bhakti Clubs”, mantra lounges, and at yoga and wellness festivals.

Full theatrical performances have been produced based on the Vedic mythologies. Prominent performance companies include Viva Kultura and Vande Arts.

Vegetarianism

Vegetarianism is one of the four tenets of ISKCON. The food habits of Hare Krishna devotees differ from all other Hindu sects in or outside India. Their food habits are even more strict and tougher to follow compared to regular Hindu vegetarian food habits. In a 5 year ethnographic research by Dr. Mayukh Dewan, the Hare Krishna food habits were studied in detail and Dr. Mayukh came up with the term 'Krishnatarian' (as opposed to vegetarian) for their food habits . "A Krishnatarian meal is one which is cooked using fresh, vegetarian ingredients (sans onion, garlic, red lentils or mushrooms) and milk products which is cooked by a Krishna conscious individual who cooks for devotion instead of for profit, and offered to Lord Krishna before it is distributed or consumed by an individual" 

With respect to AC Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada's focus on food distribution, many ISKCON devotees have opened vegan and vegetarian eateries based on the Vedic non-violent eating principles. These include the informal “Govindas’” food chain, Doughnut Plant, Divya’s Kitchen NYC and OmNom Enlightened Eating.

Not all restaurants opened by ISKCON members are officially affiliated with ISKCON, although many Govindas’ restaurants or catering businesses operate out of the main temple center.

Charitable projects

Cow Protection and ISCOWP

ISCOWP (International Society for Cow Protection) was designed to “present alternatives to agricultural and dietary practices that support and depend upon the meat and dairy industries’ slaughter of innocent animals, specifically the cow”. Their philosophy of “compassionate cow protection” stems from the Hindu Vedic value of ahimsa, or non-violence, and the deity Krishna's affection for cows and butter. ISCOWP believes that “the tenets of cow protection are universal and non-sectarian, available to all regardless of race, creed, or nationality”.

ISKCON has a number of cow protection farms and centres known as “goshalas” around the world in farming communities and temples. In 2018, Gita Nagari Eco Farm and Sanctuary was the only USDA-Certified slaughter-free dairy production facility in the United States.

ISKCON Tribal Care Trust

ISKCON Tribal Care Trust (ITCT) is an ISKCON affiliate which aims at providing socio-economic development to the tribal people.
The trust has set up schools and potable water sources for the tribal people They also distribute blankets and study materials to the tribal communities.

Food For Life Global

Main articles: Hare Krishna Food for Life and ISKCON Food Relief Foundation

Member of Food for Life Russia giving food.

Managed by ISKCON devotees but ultimately unaffiliated with the ISKCON movement, Food For Life Global is a not-for-profit vegan food relief organization with 211 international affiliates. The organization predicts Food for Life volunteers distribute 2,000,000 free meals daily through outreach to the homeless, school lunch programs, orphanages and for victims of natural disasters. Notable missions include food distribution during the Chechen Wars and during the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina.

There is internal debate as to whether food distribution efforts should be required to include religious preaching, prayer or book distribution, but as of 2020 this is not mandated by the organization. However, food distributed in these missions, as per customs of the ISKCON movement, is often offered to temple deities prior to distribution.

Management structure

Hare Krishna devotee.

ISKCON Mayapur Main Gate

Bhaktivedanta Swami spent much of the last decade of his life setting up the institution of ISKCON.

The Governing Body Commission (or GBC) was created by him in 1970. In a document Direction of Management written on 28 July 1970 Prabhupada appointed twelve members to the commission, all of them non-sannyasi, including Satsvarupa dasa Goswami, Hansadutta Swami, and Tamala Krishna Goswami. The letter outlined the purposes of the commission: improving the standard of temple management, the spread of Krishna consciousness, the distribution of books and literature, the opening of new centers and the education of the devotees. GBC has since grown in size to include 48 senior members from the movement who make decisions based on consensus of opinion.

Succession of teachings

Main article: ISKCON guru system

Chanting beads, normally of tulasi wood given by an ISKCON Guru at the initiation to an ISKCON devotee of Krishna.

ISKCON's founder A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada claimed to belong to the traditional system of paramparā, or disciplic succession, in which teachings upheld by scriptures are handed down from master to disciple, generation after generation.

Specialty programming

Youth Ministry

Most ISKCON temples offer Sunday School services for children of devotees during the weekly program. The curriculum of these classes may vary by location.

ISKCON Pandava Sena

Based out of Bhaktivedanta Manor of Watford UK, ISKCON Pandava Sena is a youth organization that aims to “connect like-minded souls to the timeless philosophy of the Vedas”. The organization started in 1994 and is now composed of a variety of professionals and university students that host annual international mentorship and reunion retreats and weekly social gatherings.

Pandava Sena has also established “KCSocs” or “Krishna Conscious Societies” across 30 universities in the UK, bringing spirituality-based programming to students and working professionals. Many universities have similar student groups featuring youth from local ISKCON temples congregating for yoga, vegan food, or mantra meditation based on the KCSoc model.

The Sanga Initiative is a similar organization that is based in the United States and hosts an annual youth retreat and camping trip for ISKCON children called Camp Ignite.

Youth Bus Tour

Also known as the Krishna Culture Festival Tours, these tours occur multiple times a year and invite students and young professionals in the bhakti tradition to take cultural performances and services to various locations, including Puerto Rico, the Caribbean, Mexico, Australia, China, Scandinavia, and Canada. There are various age and gender-specific groups available for tour participation.

ISKCON Vaishnavi Ministry

Women's roles are a controversial issue within ISKCON, and its members have strongly divergent opinions regarding the interpretation of Srila Prabhupada's teachings on gender roles. While some of its leaders advocate that women should take public leadership roles, other leaders disagree, and maintain that "traditional" roles for women are more appropriate. They fear an undesirable influence of secular feminism within ISKCON.

According to the essay "Women in ISKCON in Prabhupada's times" written by Jyotirmayi Devi Dasi, women are renowned within ISKCON and regarded as completely equal in regards to spirituality. Prabhupada in his original writings encouraged the complete equality of women in the eye of Krishna based on the teachings of Bhagavad Gita that soul does not have any gender and everybody is eligible for spiritual liberation.

Since mother is the most respected position in Vedic culture, women within the Hare Krishna community are all viewed as mothers, especially by celibate male members brahmacharis. "Mother is a term of respect for women in the International Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON), and is often prefixed to the Sanskrit name they receive in initiation. Even unmarried women are referred to as mothers".

Malati Devi Dasi is the first woman appointed to the ISKCON Governing Body Commission (GBC)

After years of discussion and reforms, a general consensus emerged to accept women as leaders and initiators in ISKCON. In 1998 Malati Devi Dasi became the first woman appointed to the GBC. The second woman leader, Dina Sharana, was selected in 2009.

An updated document was released by the GBC in 2019 stating that it was permissible for women to become initiating gurus within the ISKCON movement.

The Ministry was developed to account for the growing interest of female devotees to partake in temple practices and ensure representation in decision making.

ISKCON Child Protection Office

A suit for $900 million was filed in Texas State Court by alleged victims of abuse in the temples' schools in the 1970s and 1980s. ISKCON had to later file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. Known as the Turley Case, the eventual 2008 settlement was $15 million.

In 1998, ISKCON published an exposé of widespread physical, emotional and sexual abuse of children in the group's boarding schools in the United States and India. The Hare Krishna monks and young devotees caring for the children had no training in the task and often resented having to perform it, the report said. At a meeting in 1996, former Krishna pupils testified that they had been regularly beaten at school, denied medical care, and sexually molested and raped.

The ISKCON Central Office of Child Protection was established by the GBC in 1997, and in 2005, released its first official Child Protection Policy and Procedure Guidelines. The CPO has provided Child Protection Information Training to over 500 child care providers within the organization internationally and continues to file and review reports on local Child Protection Teams. The Child Protection Policy and Procedure Guidelines was revised and ratified by the GBC in June 2018.

Significant Organizations

The Grihastha Vision Team provides premarital, parenting and family counselling services to members of any Vaishnava community. The team is made up of volunteers who are mental health and/or educational professionals outside of the religious community.

The Bhaktivedanta Medical Associations’ mission is to ”connect and inspire all devotees within the medical profession; to improve our practice of Krishna consciousness; to assist one another to improve our service to Srila Prabhupada: and the expand Krishna consciousness among medical professionals.” Based in the US, the BMA hosts an annual medical conference for physicians and medical students with accredited North American hospitals and medical schools. Areas of interest include ayurvedic and natural health, mental health, physician burnout, meditation research, and dietary research.

Started in 2002, ISKCON Resolve is a “neutral, confidential and informal” conflict-resolution service for ISKCON congregation members and leaders. Services provided include ombudsman services, conflict mediation services, and self-help tools.

The ISKCON Domestic Abuse Coalition's mission is "to raise awareness of  within ISKCON and provide valuable resources for victims, leadership and the community at large." The group formed in 2019 to release a statement denouncing all forms of domestic violence and mistreatment of women within the ISKCON movement.

Relationship with other Religions

ISKCON has a friendly relationship with other Religious societies seeing them as contributing in inculcating spiritual values in people.

In a historic first, ISKCON brought together the four Vaishnava Sampradayas for a Sankirtan festival in the year 2015.

It also has been organizing Vaishnava-Christian dialogues in the West for over 30 years to explore common ground between the two personalistic faiths. In India they have been organized from 2015 onwards.

Persecution

From 1971-1989, ISKCON devotees were jailed and beaten for performing their faith in public by the KGB. Details of the struggle of devotees to maintain their religious practices amidst Soviet policies have been fictionalized in the play "A Taste of Salted Bread".

In 2006, a bomb blast occurred in the Iskcon Imphal in Manipur. In the bomb blast 5 devotees died and a further 50 were injured.

In 2007, the Kazakhstan government authorities demolished 25 homes belonging to the ISKCON members in Sri Vrindavan Dham commune in Almaty, on the grounds that they were illegal constructions.

In 2009, an orphanage run by the ISKCON Chittagong (Sri Sri Radha Madhava Mandir) in Bangladesh was attacked by unknown men. The gang vandalised furniture and a statue in the orphanage and beat the devotees. They also tried to take control of the temple and the orphanage.

In 2015, the ISKCON Dinajpur in Bangladesh was attacked by Jama'atul Mujahideen of Bangladesh terrorists.The terrorists opened fire and at least two people were injured in the attack.

In 2016, the Iskcon Sylhet in Bangladesh was attacked by Muslims and at least ten people were injured in that attack.

In 2018, the gate of the ISKCON Temple in Curitiba, Brazil was targeted by unknown perpetrators. The painting of Krishna with his mother Yashoda was defaced.

In 2018, Rath yatra organised by ISKCON Dhaka in Bangladesh was attacked by a group of people, leaving six devotees injured.

In 2020, the banned terrorist organisation Ansar al-Islam planned an attack on the ISKCON Dhaka but police arrested them.

In popular culture

Main article: Hare Krishna in popular culture

The Hare Krishna mantra appears in some famous songs, such as former Beatle George Harrison's 1970 hit "My Sweet Lord". John Lennon included the phrase "Hare Krishna" in his lyrics to "Give Peace a Chance" and the Beatles' 1967 track "I Am the Walrus". The backing vocalists also sing the phrase in Ringo Starr's 1971 hit "It Don't Come Easy", written with the help of Harrison, although the words were mixed low on the released version.

Of the four Beatles, only Harrison fully embraced Krishna Consciousness. He also provided financial support for ISKCON's UK branch and in 1973 purchased Bhaktivedanta Manor as their training centre. Harrison enjoyed a warm friendship with Swami Prabhupada, who provided the inspiration for Harrison songs such as "Living in the Material World".

Other influencers with roots in ISKCON include:

Gaur Gopal Das

Radhanath Swami

Indradyumna Swami

Jahnavi Harrison

Jay Shetty

Hema Malini

Ray Cappo

See also

Hinduism portal

List of International Society for Krishna Consciousness members and patrons

Hare Krsna TV

Hare Krishna movement and sexual orientation

Krishna valley, Hungary

New Vrindaban, West Virginia

References

^ Gibson 2002, p. 4

^ Gibson 2002, p. 6

^ Bharati, Baba Premanand Archived 1 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Hinduism.enacademic.com. Retrieved on 2013-07-26.

^ Beck 2005, p. 39, "According to Orthodox Gaudiya. Krishna's svarupa, or true form manifests in three ways. His svayam-rupa or transcendent form is self-existent, not dependent on anything. His tadekatma rupa is identical in essence to his true form, though it differs in appearance (and would include such forms of Krishna as Narayana and Vasudeva). His avesa form has Krishna appearing though in varying degrees of possession"

^ Cole & Dwyer 2007, p. 38

^ Profile of ISKOC on Religion Media Centre

^ Bryant & Ekstrand 2004, p. 34

^ a b "Hare Krishna". ReligionFacts. Retrieved 24 June 2019.

^ a b "Influences". patheos.com. Retrieved 24 June 2019.

^ a b Desai, Ronak D. "ISKCON Celebrates 50 Years Since Its Founding". Forbes. Retrieved 25 June 2019.

^ A Hinduism, Page 8, Lynne Gibson, 2002

^ "Bhaktivedanta Vedabase Online".

^ Gibson 2002, p. 18

^ Brzezinski, J. "Vol 6, No 2 December 1998 ICJ". www.iskcon.com. Archived from the original on 29 June 2013.

^ Laderman, Gary (2003). "ISKCON". Religion and American Cultures: An Encyclopedia of Traditions, Diversity, and Popular Expressions. Santa Barbara, Calif: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 1-57607-238-X.

^ a b c "Rites and Ceremonies". patheos.com. Retrieved 3 August 2019.

^ Hüsken, Ute, and Christiane Brosius, eds. Ritual matters: dynamic dimensions in practice. Routledge, 2010.

^ a b c Bryant, Edwin Francis. Ekstrand, Maria. (2004). The Hare Krishna movement the postcharismatic fate of a religious transplant. Columbia University Press. OCLC 748865897.CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)

^ "The Hare Krishna Temple Sunday Feast". Back to Godhead. 31 October 2019. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Festivals » Home – ISKCON – The Hare Krishna Movement". Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Ratha-yatra, The Festival of Chariots | Krishna.com". krishna.com. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ ISKON LAWBOOK, Section 4.3, International Society For Krishna Consciousness, http://krishna.ie/images/docs/2009-10-19-IskconLawBook.pdf, Publication October 19, 2009

^ Krishna Consciousness in the West – David G. Bromley, Prof. Larry D. Shinn, 1989, Page 149

^ Rochford, E Burke, Jr.Recruitment Strategies, Ideology, and Organization in the Hare Krishna Movement Social Problems Vol.29, No 4 1982

^ "India | ISKCON Centers". Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Wellness Retreat in Mumbai | Eco Resorts - Govardhan Ecovillage". ecovillage.org.in. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ Blumetti, Jordan (4 June 2019). "'It's latent misogyny': Hare Krishnas divided over whether to allow female gurus". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Temple of the Vedic Planetarium - Home". Temple of the Vedic Planetarium. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "ISKCON Vrindavan - Home". ISKCON Vrindavan. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Welcome to Vrindavan Institute for Higher Education". vihe.org. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Vrindavan Chandrodaya Mandir | The Tallest Temple in India - VCM". vcm.org.in. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Home". iskcondelhi.com. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Siliguri ward no 40". Info Data India.

^ "The Glories of Nueva Vraja Mandala, Spain". ISKCON News. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "La Nouvelle Mayapur, Iskcon New Mayapur - Luçay-le-Mâle - Hindu Temple, Religious Center | Facebook". facebook.com. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Villa Vrindavana". Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Bhaktivedanta College". Bhaktivedanta College. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Home". Radhadesh Mellows. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Bhaktivedanta Manor – Hare Krishna Temple". Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "New Home Page". The College of Vedic Studies. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ mayapur. "Home". Avanti Schools Trust. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Checkmate: ISKCON's Victory in Russia | Back to Godhead". btg.krishna.com. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "United States Of America | ISKCON Centers". Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Home". Alachua Hare Krishna Temple. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ Bhisma. "Home". Radha Kalachandji Temple. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "New Vrindaban – The Land of Krishna". newvrindaban.com. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Home - Gita Nagari Eco Farm & Sanctuary". Gita Nagari Eco Farm & Sanctuary. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "bhakticenter.org". Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "TKG Academy | TKG Academy | Dallas' Only Vegetarian Friendly Private School". Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Home | Saranagati Community Network". saranagati.ca. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Latin America | ISKCON Centers". Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Asia | ISKCON Centers". Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Russia | ISKCON Centers". Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Africa – ISKCON Centres". Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "PressReader.com - Your favorite newspapers and magazines". pressreader.com. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "ISKCON New Govardhana Australia Home". ISKCON New Govardhana Australia. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Kalasamvara Das". facebook.com. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Sadhu Sanga Retreat – Sadhu Sanga Retreat organized in the USA by Indradyumna Swami". Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Kirtan50 – Dallas New Year Kirtan Festival". Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ kishrico. "Home". The Mayapuris. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Mantra Lounge". Kirtan London - Official Website. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ Srinam. "Viva Kultura Home". Viva Kultura. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "VANDE Supports Vaishnava Arts and Culture in ISKCON". ISKCON News. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ Dewan, Mayukh (26 June 2020). "An Ethnographic Inquiry Towards 'Hare-Rama Hare-Krishna' Religious Tourists Food Consumption Habits While on a Holiday in India" (PDF). joghat.org/.

^ "Prabhupada". Food for Life Global. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Govinda's". ottawa.iskcon.ca. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "New Yorkers Go Dough Nuts for Prasadam". ISKCON News. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Home | Divya's Kitchen | Vegetarian Ayurvedic Restaurant | NYC". Divya's Kitchen. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "OMNOM London - Enlightened Eating and Yoga Studio". OmNom. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "ISCOWP – The International Society of Cow Protection". iscowp.org. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Slaughter-free milk is great for cows, but not the environment". Grist. 22 July 2014. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Tripura Minister praises ISKCON's India Tribal Care Trust". Uniindia. TNN. 18 March 2018. Retrieved 22 February 2020.

^ "Blankets and study materials distributed in tea plantation by ISKCON Tribal Care".

^ New York Times, December 12, 1995 Archived 16 June 2006 at the Wayback Machine

^ "Food for Life Global". Food for Life Global. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Undiluted Iskcon: Food For Life is a deviation". Undiluted Iskcon. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ a b c Das Goswami, S. (1982). Srila Prabhupada-lilamrta, Vol 4: In Every Town and Village, Around the World, 1968–1971. Los Angeles: Bhaktivedanta Book Trust. ISBN 978-0892131150.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ Knot, Kim "Insider and Outsider Perceptions of Prabhupada" in ISKCON Communications Journal Vol. 5, No 1, June 1997: "In an evaluation of the nature of the guru, Larry Shinn, a scholar of religions, utilised Max Weber's analysis of charisma in order to understand Prabhupada and the issue of leadership in ISKCON. He noted that 'Prabhupada profited from two intertwined sources of authority' (1987:40), the traditional authority of the disciplic lineage, parampara, inherited from his own guru, and his own charismatic authority, derived from his spiritual attainment and presence ... (49) Shinn offered an analysis based on sociological rather than spiritual (Vaishnava) authority in order to make sense of the role of guru in ISKCON and the unique qualities of Prabhupada." See also Larry D. Shinn (1987), The Dark Lord: Cult Images and the Hare Krishnas in America. Philadelphia: The Westview Press.available online

^ Cole & Dwyer 2007, pp. 181–183; 30: "Out of some of his most committed disciples, Srila Prabhupada created ISKCON's international Governing Body Commission (GBC)"

^ Maria Ekstrand; Bryant, Edwin H. (2004). The Hare Krishna movement: the postcharismatic fate of a religious transplant. New York: Columbia University Press. p. 205. ISBN 0-231-12256-X.A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada. Letter of 28 July 1970. "As we have increased our volume of activities, now I think a Governing Body Commission (hereinafter referred to as the G.B.C.) should be established. I am getting old, 75 years old, therefore at any time I may be out of the scene, therefore I think it is necessary to give instruction to my disciples how they shall manage the whole institution. They are already managing individual centers represented by one president, one secretary and one treasurer, and in my opinion they are doing nice. But we want still more improvement in the standard of Temple management, propaganda for Krishna consciousness, distribution of books and literatures, opening of new centers and educating devotees to the right standard."

^ "About". ISKCON Pandava Sena. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ Dwyer, Graham; Cole, Richard J. (March 2013). Hare Krishna in the Modern World. Arktos. ISBN 978-1-907166-47-1.

^ "The Sanga Initiative". The Sanga Initiative. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Youth Bus Tours". Youth Bus Tours. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ Rochford Jr., E. Burke. Hare Krishna Transformed. New York University Press.

^ Dasa Goswami, Hridayananda. "Role of Women".

^ Swami, Bhakti Vikasa. "Feminist Rhetoric on Dandavats".

^ "Women in ISKCON in Prabhupada's Times by Jyotirmayi Devi Dasi Reposted November 29, 2002".

^ "Bhaktivedanta Vedabase Online".

^ "Bhaktivedanta Vedabase Online".

^ Palmer, Susan (1994). Moon Sisters, Krishna Mothers, Rajneesh Lovers: Women's Role in New Religions. Syracuse, New York: Syracuse University Press. pp. 15, 17. ISBN 978-0-8156-0297-2.

^ Rochford (2007) p. 148 NYU Press

^ "Women in ISKCON Archived 29 June 2013 at Archive.today" by Visakha Dasi and Sudharma Dasi

^ "GBC Approves Vaishnavi Diksa Gurus in ISKCON". ISKCON News. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "BBC News - AMERICAS - Krishnas to file for bankruptcy". bbc.co.uk.

^ a b Goodstein, Laurie (9 October 1998). "Hare Krishna Movement Details Past Abuse at Its Boarding Schools". The New York Times.

^ "Hare Krishnas Say Suit Spurs Bankruptcy Filing". latimes. Archived from the original on 6 March 2016. Retrieved 22 July 2018.

^ "Children of ISKCON vs. ISKCON Timeline". Surrealist.org. Archived from the original on 9 February 2018. Retrieved 22 July 2018.

^ "ISKCON Child Protection Office". childprotectionoffice.org. Archived from the original on 24 August 2017. Retrieved 22 July 2018.

^ "Vaisnava Family Resources". Vaisnava Family Resources. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Bhaktivedanta Medical Association". facebook.com. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ iskconhouston.org https://iskconhouston.org/events/bmahouston2020/. Retrieved 4 January 2020. Missing or empty |title= (help)

^ "ISKCON Resolve". ISKCON Resolve. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Iskcon Domestic Abuse Coalition". facebook.com. Retrieved 8 January 2020.

^ "Four Vaishnava Sampradayas Will Join ISKCON to Chant For Change". Retrieved 27 May 2020.

^ "Vaishnava-Christian Dialogues". Retrieved 27 May 2020.

^ "Vaishnava-Christian Dialogues in India". Retrieved 27 May 2020.

^ Knott, K. (2000). "In Every Town and Village: Adaptive Strategies in the Communication of Krishna Consciousness in the UK, the First Thirty Years". Social Compass. 47 (2): 153. doi:10.1177/003776800047002002.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ Larry Shinn. "The Maturation of the Hare Krishnas in America". Archived from the original on 3 January 2013. Retrieved 18 April 2008. Cite journal requires |journal= (help)CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ "People vs. Murphy". The Leagle. 16 March 1977.

^ "Judge Rejects Charges of Brainwashing against Hare Krishna Leaders". New York Times. 18 March 1977.

^ "ISKCON front for money laundering: Swami Swaroopanand Saraswati". City: New Delhi. Economictimes. TNN. 9 February 2016. Retrieved 31 January 2020.

^ "Can Hare Krishnas at Palace of Gold in W.Va. rebuild its tarnished community?". Washington Post.

^ "Bhola clash: Hefazat holds protest rally in front of Baitul Mukarram mosque". Dhaka Tribune. 22 October 2019. Retrieved 1 February 2020.

^ "A Taste of Salted Bread | Krishna.com". krishna.com. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Five killed in Manipur temple blast | India News - Times of India". M.timesofindia.com. 16 August 2006. Retrieved 16 July 2020.

^ "Iskcon temple blast case cracked - Telegraph India". M.telegraphindia.com. Retrieved 16 July 2020.

^ "Kazakhstan: Hare Krishna Community Faces Uncertain Future". City: Kazakhstan. Eurasianet. TNN. 28 November 2007. Retrieved 2 January 2020.

^ "Punish temple attackers in Ctg". City: Chittagong. Dailystar. TNN. 16 May 2009. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "Now gun attack on Iskcon temple in Dinajpur". City:Dhaka. Dhakatribune. TNN. 10 December 2015. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ "JMB operative confesses involvement". City: Dinajpur. Dailystar. TNN. 7 January 2016. Retrieved 4 January 2020.

^ https://www.dhakatribune.com/bangladesh/2016/09/03/least-10-injured-sylhet-iskcon-temple-attack/

^ "Clash between Hindus, Muslims at ISKCON temple in Bangladesh, 10 injured". Dnaindia.com. 3 September 2016. Retrieved 16 July 2020.

^ "Brazil: Vandals target ISKCON Temple, deface Lord Krishna's pic". City: World. Currentriggers. TNN. Retrieved 2 January 2020.

^ "Religious procession by Hindus attacked in Bangladesh". City: World. Business Standard. TNN. Retrieved 6 February 2020.

^ "5 Ansar-al-Islam members held in Dhaka". City: Dhaka. Dhaka Tribune. TNN. Retrieved 15 February 2020.

^ Graham M. Schweig, "Krishna: The Intimate Deity", in Bryant and Ekstrand, p. 14.

^ Lavezzoli 2006, p. 186

^ Spizer 2005, p. 294.

^ Cole & Dwyer 2007, pp. 31–32

^ Greene 2006, pp. 148, 198–199

^ Carol Clerk, "George Harrison", Uncut, February 2002; available at Rock's Backpages (subscription required).

^ Lavezzoli 2006, pp. 194–195

Sources

Beck, Guy L., ed. (2005). Alternative Krishnas: Regional and Vernacular Variations on a Hindu Deity. SUNY Press. ISBN 0-7914-6415-6.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Bryant, Edwin F.; Ekstrand, Maria, eds. (2004). The Hare Krishna Movement: The Postcharismatic Fate of a Religious Transplant. New York, NY: Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-12256-X.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Cole, Richard; Dwyer, Graham (2007). The Hare Krishna Movement: Forty Years of Chant and Change. London: I. B. Tauris. ISBN 978-1-84511-407-7.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Gibson, Lynne (2002). Modern World Religions: Hinduism – Pupil Book Core (Modern World Religions). Oxford (England): Heinemann Educational Publishers. ISBN 0-435-33619-3.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Greene, Joshua M. (2006). Here Comes the Sun: The Spiritual and Musical Journey of George Harrison. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-470-12780-3.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

"ISKCON in Indonesia". Archived from the original on 21 January 2019. Retrieved 22 July 2018.

Lavezzoli, Peter (2006). The Dawn of Indian Music in the West. New York: Continuum. ISBN 0-8264-2819-3.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Spizer, Bruce (2005). The Beatles Solo on Apple Records. New Orleans, LA: 498 Productions. ISBN 0-9662649-5-9.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

External links

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to International Society for Krishna Consciousness.

Official website

Works by or about ISKCON at Internet Archive

Works by or about Hare Krishna at Internet Archive

v

t

e

ISKCON temples

International Society for Krishna Consciousness

India 
Bangalore

Chennai

Delhi

Mumbai

Patna

Pune

Ujjain

Visakhapatnam

Vrindavan Chandrodaya Mandir

Vrindavan

Outside India 
Bhaktivedanta Manor (Hertfordshire, UK)

Hare Krishna Temple (Toronto) (CA)

Inis Rath (Loch Erne, UK)

New Vrindaban, West Virginia (US)

Radha Krishna Temple (London, UK)

Sri Sri Radha Krishna Temple (Spanish Fork) (US)

Radha Golokabihari Temple (Fiji)

ISKCON Temple Dharan (Nepal)

 Category

v

t

e

Chaitanya Sampradaya

Sampradaya Acharyas

Pre Chaitanya 
Kṛṣṇa

Brahmā

Nārada

Vyāsa

Madhvācārya

Padmanābha Tīrtha

Narahari Tīrtha

Mādhava Tīrtha

Akṣobhya Tīrtha

Jaya Tīrtha

Jñānasindhu

Dayānidhi

Vidyānidhi

Rājendra

Jayadharma

Puruṣottama

Brahmaṇya Tīrtha

Vyāsa Tīrtha

Lakshmipati Tīrtha

Mādhavendra Purī

Īśvara Purī

Advaita Acharya

Post Chaitanya 
Sri Krishna Chaitanya

Haridāsa

Nitai

Rūpa
Svarūpa

Sanātana

Raghunātha, Jīva

Kṛṣṇadāsa

Narottama

Viśvanātha

Jagannātha

Modern 
Bhaktivinoda

Gaurakiśora

Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī

Bon

Prabhupāda

Ballabh Tirtha

Bhaktisvarupa Damodar

Jayapataka

Narayana

Paramadwaiti

Prajnana Kesava

Pramode Puri

Sridhar

Shrivatsa Goswami

Tripurari

Vaibhava Puri

Topics 
Bhakti

Supreme Personality of Godhead

Japa

Yoga

Meditation

Hare Krishna

Mantras

Puja

Arati

Bhajan

Kirtan

Sattvic diet

Ahimsa

Rishis

Tilaka

Guru

Diksha

Avataras of God 
Matsya

Kurma

Varaha

Krishna

Balarama

Rama

Narasimha

Vamana

Buddha

Parashurama

Kalki

Dhanvantari

Kapila

Holy texts 
Vedanta (Dvaitadvaita * Dvaita * Vishishtadvaita * Shuddhadvaita * Achintya Bheda Abheda)

Bhagavad Gita

Shrimad Bhagavatam

Vedas

Chaitanya Charitamrita

Ramayana

Mahabharata

Puranas

Upanishads

Chaitanya Bhagavata

Organizations 
Gaudiya Math

Gaudiya Mission

ISKCON

Sri Sri Radha Govindaji Trust

Spiritual abodes 
Goloka Vrindavana

Vaikuntha

Ayodhya

Holy attributes 
Lotus

Sudarshana Chakra

Narayanastra

Kaumodaki

Nandaki

Sharangam

Shankha

Famous bhaktas 
Hanuman

Arjuna

Prahlada

Narada

Haridasa

Six Goswamis of Vrindavana

Holy days 
Rama Navami

Janmashtami

Gaura-purnima

Ekadashi

Writers 
Vrindavana Dasa Thakura

Vyasa

Valmiki

Pancha-tattva 
Nitai

Advaita Acharya

Gadadhara Pandita

Srivasa Thakura

Names of Godhead 
Sahasranama

Rama sahasranama

Vishnu sahasranama

List of names of Vishnu

List of titles and names of Krishna

Hari

Worship 
Karatalas

Mridangam

Harmonium

Incense of India

Om

Hindu temple

Japamala

Comparative study 
Nastika

Advaita

Adevism

Anti-Hinduism

Criticism of Hinduism

Persecution of Hindus

Asura

Hinduism and other religions (Buddhism and Hinduism * Gautama Buddha in Hinduism

Jainism and Hinduism

Rama in Jainism

Hindu–Islamic relations

Hinduism and Judaism

Hinduism and Sikhism

Ayyavazhi and Hinduism

Bahá'í Faith and Hinduism

Christianity in India)

Reincarnation

Karma

Diet in Hinduism

God in Hinduism

Moksha

Samsara

Vegetarianism

Astika

Other 
Jagannatha

Narayana

Brahman

Paramatma

Bhagavan

Tulasi

Devis list

Tridevi

Radharani

Sita

Deva

Demigods list

Trimurti

Indian philosophy

Dharma

Artha

Arthashastra

Kama

Indian idealism

Varna

Ashrama

Swami

Goswami

Krishnology

Vaishnava theology

Hinduism by country

Hindu cosmology

Hindu units of time

Hindu views on evolution

Hindu calendar

Hindu astrology

List of numbers in Hindu scriptures

Hinduism portal

v

t

e

Modern Gaudiya Vaishnavas (1875 to date)

Gaudiya Math (pre-ISKCON)

Bhakti Hridaya Bon Swami

Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Thakura

Bhaktivinoda Thakur

Gaurakishora Dasa Babaji

Jagannatha Dasa Babaji

Sadananda

Vamana Dasa

Governing Body Commission,

and other ISKCON Gurus 
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada*

Bhakti Caitanya Swami*

Bhakti Charu Swami*

Bhaktisvarupa Damodar Swami*

Bhakti Tirtha Swami*

Bhakti Vijnana Goswami

Giriraja Swami*

Gopala Krishna Goswami*

Gour Govinda Swami*

Hanumatpresaka Swami*

Indradyumna Swami*

Jayadvaita Swami*

Jayapataka Swami*

Kadamba Kanana Swami*

Lokanatha Swami*

Mukunda Goswami*

Radhanath Swami*

Ravindra Svarupa Dasa*

Romapada Swami*

Sacinandana Swami*

Satsvarupa dasa Goswami*

Sivarama Swami*

Suhotra Swami*

Tamala Krishna Goswami*

Bhanu Swami *

Other ISKCON Vaishnavas

(1966 to date) 
Richard Shaw Brown

Michael Cremo

Alfred Ford

Geoffrey Giuliano

Hansadutta Swami

Harikesa Swami

Hridaya Caitanya Dasa

Jayananda Dasa

Jayatirtha Dasa

Kirtanananda Swami

Krishna Dharma

Kurt Mausert

Malati Dasi

Radhika Ramana Dasa

Ramesh Kallidai

Ramesvara Das

Ranchor Prime

Sadhu Priya Das

Steven J. Rosen

Graham Schweig

Shaunaka Rishi Das

Richard L. Thompson

Urmila Devi Dasi

Visnujana Swami

Yadunandana Swami

Other Vaishnava Societies 
Bhakti Ballabh Tirtha

Bhakti Prajnana Kesava Goswami

Bhakti Pramode Puri Goswami 

Bhakti Rakshak Sridhar Goswami 

Bhakti Vaibhava Puri Goswami

Bhaktivedanta Narayana Goswami 

Paramadwaiti Swami 

Shrivatsa Goswami 

Tripurari Swami

*ISKCON guru

v

t

e

Bengali Hindus

Society

Groups 
Babu

Bangal

Bhadralok

Ghoti

Castes 
Aguri

Bagdi

Baidya

Baishya Kapali

Baishya Saha

Barujibi

Bauri

Brahmin

Chunaru

Dom

Gandhabanik

Suvarna Banik

Hari

 Kaibartya

Kansabanik

Karmakar

Bengali Kayastha

Mahishya

Malla

Namassej

Sadgop

Shunri

Yogi

Religion

Books 
Bhagavad Gita

Chandi

Panchali

Matuasmritokotha

Sects 
Brahmo

Kartabhaja

Shaiva

Shakta

Vaishnava

Orders 
Adi Brahmo Samaj

Ananda Marga

Bharat Sevashram Sangha

Brahmo Conference Organisation

Brahmo Samaj

Gaudiya Math

Gaudiya Mission

International Society for Krishna Consciousness

Matua Mahasangha

Ramakrishna Math

Ramakrishna Mission

Ramakrishna Order

Ramakrishna Sarada Math

Sadharan Brahmo Samaj

Self-Realization Fellowship

Sri Aurobindo Ashram

Vedanta Society

World Brahmo Council

Yogoda Satsanga Society of India

Festivals 
Poila Baisakh

Rabindra Jayanti

Akshaya Tritiya

Buddho Purnima

Shashthi

Savitri Brata

Ambubachi Mela

Dhamrai Jagannath Roth

Jhulan Purnima

Janmashtami

Bhadu

Ganesh Chaturthi

Vishwakarma Puja

Durga Puja

Lakshmi Puja

Diwali

Kali Puja

Bhai Phonta

Shakta Rash

Nabanna

Jagaddhatri Puja

Kalpataru Day

Swami Vivekananda's Birthday

Makar Sankranti

Maghotsab

Saraswati Puja

Maha Shivaratri

Dol Purnima

Holi

Gajan

Pratapaditya Utsav

Ekadashi

Kumbh Mela

Gangasagar

Culture

Music 
Rabindra Sangeet

Shyama Sangeet

Kirtan

Dance 
Gaudiya Nritya

Rabindra Nritya Natya

Literature 
Vaishnava Padavali

Mangal-Kavya

 Panchali

Kallol

Hungry generation

Folk culture

Folk art 
Dhokra

Sholapith

Folk dance 
Raibenshe

Chhau

Paika

Dhamail

Alkap

Gombhira

Kavigan

Others 
Bengali Hindu mythology and culture

Bengali Hindu diaspora

v

t

e

Hindu reform movements

Adi Dharm/Brahmoism
Brahmo Samaj

Sadharan Brahmo Samaj

Ananda Marga

Arya Samaj

Ayyavazhi

Brahma Kumaris

Chinmaya Mission

Divine Life Society

Hanuman Foundation

Himalayan Institute of Yoga Science and Philosophy

Hindutva

ISKCON

Isha Foundation

Mahima Dharma

Matua Mahasangha

Prarthana Samaj

Ramakrishna Mission

Sahaja Yoga

Sathya Sai Organization

Self-Realization Fellowship / Yogoda Satsanga

Shri Ram Chandra Mission

Sri Aurobindo Ashram

Swadhyay Parivar

Transcendental Meditation

Topics 
Bhakti

Brahmacharya

Caste

Neo-Vedanta

Persecution of Hindus

Shuddhi

Women in Hinduism

Gurus and

revivalist writers 
Amritanandamayi

Anandamayi Ma

Arumuka Navalar

Athavale

Aurobindo

Boro Maa

Chatterjee

Chinmayananda Saraswati

Chinmoy

Dayananda Saraswati

Debendranath Tagore

Daya Mata

Haidakhan Babaji

Jaggi Vasudev

Kelkar, N. C.

Lekhraj

Maharishi Mahesh Yogi

Mahatma Gandhi

Mirra Alfassa

Neem Karoli

Nirmala

Ram Chandra

Ram Dass

Ram Mohan Roy

Ramakrishna

Ramana Maharshi

Ravi Shankar

Sarkar

Sathya Sai Baba

Savarkar

Sen, K. C.

Shraddhanand

Sister Nivedita

Sivananda

Swami Rama

Tilak

Vaswani

Vipulananda

Vishnudevananda

Vivekananda

Yogananda

more

v

t

e

New religious movements

Major groups 
Adi Dharm/Brahmoism

Ahmadiyya

AllatRa

Ananda Marga

Ancient Mystical Order Rosae Crucis

Anthroposophy

Antoinism

Armstrongism

Azali

Bábism

Bahá'í Faith

Brahma Kumaris

Branch Davidians

Caodaism

Chabad

Chinmaya Mission

Christadelphians

Christian Science

Church of Divine Science

Church of Satan (LaVeyan Satanism)

Church of Scientology

Church of the Guanche People

Church of the SubGenius

Creativity

Discordianism

Falun Gong

Family International

Friends of Man

Fourth Way

 Fung Loy Kok

Goddess

Heathenry

Heaven's Gate

Iglesia ni Cristo

ISKCON

Invitation to Life

Japanese

Jehovah's Witnesses

Kingdom of Jesus Christ

Latter Day Saints

Maha Bodhi Society

Nation of Islam

New Acropolis

New Apostolic Church

The New Church

Noahidism

Oomoto

Opus Dei

Peoples Temple

Pilgrims of Arès

The Process Church

Raëlism

Rajneesh

Ramakrishna Mission

Rastafari

Religious Science

Sahaja Yoga

Sathya Sai Baba

Seventh-day Adventist Church

Shakers

Shambhala Buddhism

Shri Ram Chandra Mission

Soka Gakkai

Sukyo Mahikari

Temple of Set

Tenrikyo

Thelema

Theosophy (Theosophical Society)

Transcendental Meditation

True Buddha School

Twelve Tribes

UFO religion

Unification

Unitarian Universalist Association

Unity Church

Universal Church of the Kingdom of God

Universal White Brotherhood

The Way International

Wicca

Word of Faith

World Mission Society Church of God

Notable figures 
Mirza Ghulam Ahmad

Herbert W. Armstrong

Shoko Asahara

Sri Aurobindo

Subh-i-Azal

Báb

Sathya Sai Baba

Bahá'u'lláh

Alice Bailey

Chinmayananda Saraswati

David Berg

Helena Blavatsky

Sri Chinmoy

Aleister Crowley

Mary Baker Eddy

Josemaría Escrivá

Charles Fillmore

Hak Ja Han

L. Ron Hubbard

Li Hongzhi

Anton LaVey

Jorge Ángel Livraga Rizzi

Lu Sheng-yen

Maharishi Mahesh Yogi

Meher Baba

Sun Myung Moon

Elijah Muhammad

Nakayama Miki

A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada

Phineas Quimby

Rajneesh

Ramakrishna

Prem Rawat

Helena Roerich

Charles Taze Russell

Joseph Franklin Rutherford

Ahn Sahng-hong

Prabhat Ranjan Sarkar

Joseph Smith

Nirmala Srivastava

Emanuel Swedenborg

Rudolf Steiner

Joseph W. Tkach

Chögyam Trungpa

Ellen G. White

Concepts 
African-initiated church

Afrocentrism

Buddhist modernism

Chabad messianism

Charismatic Movement

Christian denomination

Classifications of religious movements

Conspiracy theories

Cult

Cybersectarianism

Doomsday cult

Goddess movement

Heresy

Hindu reform movements

In-group favoritism

Japanese new religions

Modern Paganism

Neoshamanism

New Age

New Thought

Open-source religion

Pacific Northwest

Personal development

Prosperity theology

Religious conversion

Satanism

Schism

Sect

Self religion

Spiritual evolution

Syncretism

UFO religion

Vipassana movement

Public education 
CESNUR

INFORM (Information Network Focus on Religious Movements)

Scholarship 
Academic study of new religious movements

Journal of Contemporary Religion

Nova Religio

Sociology of religion

When Prophecy Fails

Opposition 
Anti-cult movement

Anti-Mormonism

Christian countercult movement

Persecution of Ahmadis

Persecution of Bahá'ís

Persecution of Falun Gong

Persecution of Jehovah's Witnesses

Lists 
In popular culture

New religious movements

Academic study
