"Canadian-American stage magician and scientific skeptic

James Randi

Born Randall James Hamilton Zwinge

(1928-08-07) August 7, 1928 (age 91)

Toronto, Ontario, Canada

Nationality Canadian

American (naturalized)

Occupation Magician

illusionist

author

skeptic

Years active 1946−2015

Spouse(s) José Alvarez (born Deyvi Orangel Peña Arteaga) (m. 2013)

James Randi's voice

recorded October 2016 at CSICon

* * *

Problems playing this file? See media help.

Website www.randi.org

Signature

James Randi (born Randall James Hamilton Zwinge; August 7, 1928) is a Canadian-American retired stage magician and a scientific skeptic who has extensively challenged paranormal and pseudoscientific claims. Randi is the co-founder of the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry (CSI), originally known as the Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal (CSICOP). He is also the founder of the James Randi Educational Foundation (JREF). He began his career as a magician under the stage name The Amazing Randi and later chose to devote most of his time to investigating paranormal, occult, and supernatural claims, which he collectively calls "woo-woo". Randi retired from practicing magic at age 60, and from the JREF at 87.

Although often referred to as a "debunker", Randi has said he dislikes the term's connotations and prefers to describe himself as an "investigator". He has written about paranormal phenomena, skepticism, and the history of magic. He was a frequent guest on The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson, famously exposing fraudulent faith healer Peter Popoff, and was occasionally featured on the television program Penn & Teller: Bullshit!.

Before Randi's retirement, JREF sponsored the One Million Dollar Paranormal Challenge, which offered a prize of one million US dollars to eligible applicants who could demonstrate evidence of any paranormal, supernatural, or occult power or event under test conditions agreed to by both parties. In 2015 the James Randi Educational Foundation said they will no longer accept applications directly from people claiming to have a paranormal power, but will offer the challenge to anyone who has passed a preliminary test that meets with their approval. The foundation continues to make grants to non-profit groups that encourage critical thinking and a fact-based world view.

Contents

1 Early life

2 Career

2.1 Magician

2.2 Author

2.3 Skeptic

2.4 Exploring Psychic Powers ... Live television show

2.5 James Randi Educational Foundation (JREF)

2.6 2010s

3 Views on religion

4 One Million Dollar Paranormal Challenge

5 Legal disputes

5.1 Uri Geller

5.2 Other cases

6 Personal life

7 Political views

8 Awards and honors

9 World records

10 Bibliography

11 Television and film

11.1 Actor

11.2 Himself

12 Other media

13 See also

14 Notes

15 References

16 Further reading

17 External links

Early life

Randi was born on August 7, 1928 in Toronto, Ontario, Canada, the son of Marie Alice (née Paradis) and George Randall Zwinge. He has a younger brother and sister. He took up magic after seeing Harry Blackstone Sr. and reading conjuring books while spending 13 months in a body cast following a bicycle accident. He confounded doctors who expected he would never walk again. Randi often skipped classes and, at 17, dropped out of high school to perform as a conjurer in a carnival roadshow. He practised as a mentalist in local nightclubs and at Toronto's Canadian National Exhibition and wrote for Montreal's tabloid press.

In his twenties, Randi posed as an astrologer and, to establish that they were actually doing simple tricks, he briefly wrote an astrological column in the Canadian tabloid Midnight under the name "Zo-ran" by simply shuffling up items from newspaper astrology columns and pasting them randomly into a column. In his thirties, Randi worked in the UK, Europe, Philippine nightclubs, and all across Japan. He witnessed many tricks that were presented as being supernatural. One of his earliest reported experiences is that of seeing an evangelist using a version of the "one-ahead" technique to convince churchgoers of his divine powers.

Career

Magician

A fork bent by Randi

Though defining himself as a conjuror, Randi began a career as a professional stage magician and escapologist in 1946. He initially presented himself under his real name, Randall Zwinge, which he later dropped in favor of "The Amazing Randi". Early in his career, he performed numerous escape acts from jail cells and safes around the world. On February 7, 1956, he appeared live on NBC's Today show, where he remained for 104 minutes in a sealed metal coffin that had been submerged in a hotel swimming pool, breaking what was said to be Harry Houdini's record of 93 minutes, though Randi calls attention to the fact that he was much younger than Houdini had been when he established the original record in 1926.

Randi was a frequent guest on the Long John Nebel program on New York radio station WOR, and did character voices for commercials.:31:00 After Nebel moved to WNBC in 1962, Randi was given Nebel's time slot on WOR, where he hosted The Amazing Randi Show from 1967 to 1968.:35:00  The show often had guests who defended paranormal claims, among them Randi's then-friend James W. Moseley. Randi says he quit WOR over complaints from the archbishop of New York that Randi had said on-air that "Jesus Christ was a religious nut," a claim that Randi himself disputed.:35:00

Randi also hosted numerous television specials and went on several world tours. As "The Amazing Randi" he appeared regularly on the New York-based children's television series Wonderama from 1959 to 1967. In 1970, he auditioned for a revival of the 1950s children's show The Magic Clown, which showed briefly in Detroit and in Kenya, but was never picked up. In the February 2, 1974, issue of the British conjuring magazine Abracadabra, Randi, in defining the community of magicians, stated: "I know of no calling which depends so much upon mutual trust and faith as does ours." In the December 2003 issue of The Linking Ring, the monthly publication of the International Brotherhood of Magicians, it is stated: "Perhaps Randi's ethics are what make him Amazing" and "The Amazing Randi not only talks the talk, he walks the walk."

During Alice Cooper's 1973–1974 Billion Dollar Babies tour, Randi performed on stage both as a mad dentist and as Alice's executioner. He also built several of the stage props, including the guillotine. In a 1976 performance for the Canadian TV special World of Wizards, Randi escaped from a straitjacket while suspended upside-down over Niagara Falls.

Randi has been accused of actually using "psychic powers" to perform acts such as spoon bending. According to James Alcock, at a meeting where Randi was duplicating the performances of Uri Geller, a professor from the University at Buffalo shouted out that Randi was a fraud. Randi said: "Yes, indeed, I'm a trickster, I'm a cheat, I'm a charlatan, that's what I do for a living. Everything I've done here was by trickery." The professor shouted back: "That's not what I mean. You're a fraud because you're pretending to do these things through trickery, but you're actually using psychic powers and misleading us by not admitting it." A similar event involved Senator Claiborne Pell, a confirmed believer in psychic phenomena. When Randi personally demonstrated to Pell that he could reveal—by simple trickery—a concealed drawing that had been secretly made by the senator, Pell refused to believe that it was a trick, saying: "I think Randi may be a psychic and doesn't realize it." Randi has consistently denied having any paranormal powers or abilities.

Randi is a member of the Society of American Magicians (SAM), the International Brotherhood of Magicians (IBM), and The Magic Circle in the UK, holding the rank of "Member of the Inner Magic Circle with Gold Star."

Randi has said that the hardest people to fool are not the highly educated, but children, who are not sophisticated enough to be fooled because they have not learned the body cues that adults recognize and which magicians take advantage of.

Author

Randi is the author of ten books, among them Conjuring (1992), a biographical history of noted magicians. The book is subtitled Being a Definitive History of the Venerable Arts of Sorcery, Prestidigitation, Wizardry, Deception, & Chicanery and of the Mountebanks & Scoundrels Who have Perpetrated these Subterfuges on a Bewildered Public, in short, MAGIC! The book's cover says that it is by "James Randi, Esq., A Contrite Rascal Once Dedicated to these Wicked Practices but Now Almost Totally Reformed". The book selects the most influential magicians and tells some of their history, often in the context of strange deaths and careers on the road. This work expanded on Randi's second book titled Houdini, His Life and Art. This illustrated work was published in 1976 and was co-authored with Bert Sugar. It focuses on the professional and private life of Houdini.

Randi also wrote a children's book in 1989 titled The Magic World of the Amazing Randi, which introduced children to magic tricks. In addition to his magic books, he has written several educational works about paranormal and pseudoscientific claims. These include biographies of Uri Geller and Nostradamus as well as reference material on other major paranormal figures. He is currently working on A Magician in the Laboratory, which recounts his application of skepticism to science. He was a member of the all-male literary banqueting club the Trap Door Spiders, which served as the basis of his good friend Isaac Asimov's fictional group of mystery solvers, the Black Widowers.

Other books are Flim-Flam! (1982), The Faith Healers (1987), James Randi, Psychic Investigator (1991), Test Your ESP Potential (1982) and An Encyclopedia of Claims, Frauds, and Hoaxes of the Occult and Supernatural (1995).

Randi was a regular contributor to Skeptic magazine, penning the "'Twas Brillig ..." column, and also served on its editorial board. He is also a frequent contributor to Skeptical Inquirer magazine, which is published by CSI, of which he is also a Fellow.

Skeptic

Randi using sleight of hand to duplicate "psychic surgery" on his Open Media series for ITV in 1991

Randi gained the international spotlight in 1972 when he publicly challenged the claims of Uri Geller. He accused Geller of being nothing more than a charlatan and a fraud who used standard magic tricks to accomplish his allegedly paranormal feats, and he presented his claims in the book The Truth About Uri Geller (1982).

Believing that it was important to get columnists and TV personalities to challenge Geller and others like him, Randi and CSICOP reached out in an attempt to educate them. Randi said that CSICOP had a "very substantial influence on the printed media ... in those days.":20:05 During this effort, Randi made contact with Johnny Carson and discovered that he was "very much on our side. He wasn't only a comedian ... he was a great thinker.":21:15 According to Randi, when he was on The Tonight Show, Carson broke his usual protocol of not talking with guests before their entrance on stage, but instead would ask what Randi wanted to be emphasized in the interview. "He wanted to be aware of how he could help me.":21:30

In 1973, Geller appeared on The Tonight Show, and this appearance is recounted in the Nova documentary "Secrets of the Psychics".

In the documentary, Randi says that Carson "had been a magician himself and was skeptical" of Geller's claimed paranormal powers, so before the date of taping, Randi was asked "to help prevent any trickery". Per Randi's advice, the show prepared its own props without informing Geller, and did not let Geller or his staff "anywhere near them". When Geller joined Carson on stage, he appeared surprised that he was not going to be interviewed, but instead was expected to display his abilities using the provided articles. Geller said "This scares me" and "I'm surprised because before this program your producer came and he read me at least 40 questions you were going to ask me." Geller was unable to display any paranormal abilities, saying "I don't feel strong" and expressing his displeasure at feeling like he was being "pressed" to perform by Carson. According to Adam Higginbotham's Nov. 7, 2014 article in the New York Times:

The result was a legendary immolation, in which Geller offered up flustered excuses to his host as his abilities failed him again and again. "I sat there for 22 minutes, humiliated," Geller told me, when I spoke to him in September. "I went back to my hotel, devastated. I was about to pack up the next day and go back to Tel Aviv. I thought, That's it — I'm destroyed."

However, this appearance on The Tonight Show, which Carson and Randi had orchestrated to debunk Geller's claimed abilities, backfired. According to Higginbotham,

To Geller's astonishment, he was immediately booked on The Merv Griffin Show. He was on his way to becoming a paranormal superstar. "That Johnny Carson show made Uri Geller," Geller said. To an enthusiastically trusting public, his failure only made his gifts seem more real: if he were performing magic tricks, they would surely work every time.

According to Higginbotham, this result caused Randi to realize that much more must be done to stop Geller and those like him. So in 1976, Randi approached Ray Hyman, a psychologist who had observed the tests of Geller's ability at Stanford and thought them slipshod, and suggested they create an organization dedicated to combating pseudoscience. Later that same year, together with Martin Gardner, a Scientific American columnist whose writing had helped hone Hyman's and Randi's skepticism, they formed the Committee for Scientific Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal (CSICOP).

Using donations and sales of their magazine, Skeptical Inquirer, they and secular humanist philosopher Paul Kurtz took seats on the executive board, with Isaac Asimov and Carl Sagan joining as founding members. Randi traveled the world on behalf of CSICOP, becoming its public face, and according to Hyman, the face of the skeptical movement.

András G. Pintér, producer and co-host of the European Skeptics Podcast called Randi the grandfather of European skepticism by virtue of Randi "playing a role in kickstarting several European organizations."

Geller sued Randi and CSICOP for $15 million in 1991 and lost. Geller's suit against CSICOP was thrown out in 1995, and he was ordered to pay $120,000 for filing a frivolous lawsuit. The legal costs Randi incurred used almost all of a $272,000 MacArthur Foundation grant awarded to Randi in 1986 for his work. Randi also dismissed Geller's claims that he was capable of the kind of psychic photography made famous by the case of Ted Serios. It is a matter, Randi argues, of trick photography using a simple hand-held optical device. During the period of Geller's legal dispute, CSICOP's leadership, wanting to avoid becoming a target of Geller's litigation, demanded that Randi refrain from commenting on Geller. Randi refused and resigned, though he has maintained a respectful relationship with the group, which in 2006 changed its name to the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry (CSI). In 2010, Randi was one of 16 new CSI fellows elected by its board.

Randi has gone on to write many articles criticizing beliefs and claims regarding the paranormal. He has also demonstrated flaws in studies suggesting the existence of paranormal phenomena; in his Project Alpha hoax, Randi successfully planted two fake psychics in a privately funded psychic research experiment. The hoax became a scandal and demonstrated the shortcomings of many paranormal research projects at the university level.

Randi has appeared on numerous TV shows, sometimes to directly debunk the claimed abilities of fellow guests. In a 1981 appearance on That's My Line, Randi appeared opposite claimed psychic James Hydrick, who said that he could move objects with his mind and appeared to demonstrate this claim on live television by turning a page in a telephone book without touching it. Randi, having determined that Hydrick was surreptitiously blowing on the book, arranged foam packaging peanuts on the table in front of the telephone book for the demonstration. This prevented Hydrick from demonstrating his abilities, which would have been exposed when the blowing moved the packaging. Randi writes that, eventually, Hydrick "confessed everything".

Randi speaking at the first CSICOP Conference, in Buffalo, New York, 1983

Randi was awarded a MacArthur Foundation Fellowship in 1986. The fellowship's five-year $272,000 grant helped support Randi's investigations of faith healers, including W. V. Grant, Ernest Angley, and Peter Popoff, whom Randi first exposed on The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson in February 1986. Hearing about his investigation of Popoff, Carson invited Randi onto his show without seeing the evidence he was going to reveal. Carson appeared stunned after Randi showed a brief video segment from one of Popoff's broadcasts showing him calling out a woman in the audience, revealed personal information about her that he claimed came from God, and then performed a laying-on-of-hands healing to drive the devil from her body. Randi then replayed the video, but with some of the sound dubbed in that he and his investigating team captured during the event using a radio scanner and recorder. Their scanner had detected the radio frequency Popoff's wife Elizabeth was using backstage to broadcast directions and information to a miniature radio receiver hidden in Popoff's left ear. That information had been gathered by Popoff's assistants, who had handed out "prayer cards" to the audience before the show, instructing them to write down all the information Popoff would need to pray for them.

The news coverage generated by Randi's exposé on The Tonight Show led to many TV stations dropping Popoff's show, eventually forcing him into bankruptcy in September 1987. However, the televangelist returned soon after with faith-healing infomercials that reportedly attracted more than $23 million in 2005 from viewers sending in money for promised healing and prosperity. The Canadian Centre for Inquiry's Think Again! TV documented one of Popoff's more recent performances before a large audience who gathered in Toronto on May 26, 2011, hoping to be saved from illness and poverty.

In February 1988, Randi tested the gullibility of the media by perpetrating a hoax of his own. By teaming up with Australia's 60 Minutes program and by releasing a fake press package, he built up publicity for a "spirit channeler" named Carlos, who was actually artist José Alvarez, Randi's partner. While performing as Carlos, Alvarez was prompted by Randi using sophisticated radio equipment. According to the 60 Minutes program on the Carlos hoax, "it was claimed that Alvarez would not have had the audience he did at the Opera House (and the potential sales therefrom) had the media coverage been more aggressive (and factual)", though an analysis by The Skeptic's Tim Mendham concluded that, while the media coverage of Alvarez's appearances was not credulous, the hoax "at least showed that they could benefit by being a touch more sceptical". The hoax was exposed on 60 Minutes Australia; "Carlos" and Randi explained how they had pulled it off.

In his book The Faith Healers, Randi wrote that his anger and relentlessness arose from compassion for the victims of fraud. Randi has also been critical of João de Deus (John of God), a self-proclaimed psychic surgeon who has received international attention. Randi observed, referring to psychic surgery, "To any experienced conjurer, the methods by which these seeming miracles are produced are very obvious."

Randi (far right) at 1983 CSICOP Conference in Buffalo, New York, with (from left) Pip Smith, Philip J. Klass (standing), Dick Smith, Robert Sheaffer and John Merrell

In 1982, Randi verified the abilities of Arthur Lintgen, a Philadelphia doctor, who was able to identify the classical music recorded on a vinyl LP solely by examining the grooves on the record. However, Lintgen did not claim to have any paranormal ability, merely knowledge of the way that the groove forms patterns on particular recordings.

In 1988, John Maddox, editor of the prominent science journal Nature, asked Randi to join the supervision and observation of the homeopathy experiments conducted by Jacques Benveniste's team. Once Randi's stricter protocol for the experiment was in place, the positive results could not be reproduced.

The James Randi Beard Photo, taken at the JREF Amaz!ng Meeting 9 ("TAM 9 From Outer Space"), July 16, 2011

James Randi stated that Daniel Dunglas Home, who could allegedly play an accordion that was locked in a cage without touching it, was caught cheating on a few occasions, but the incidents were never made public. He also stated that the actual instrument in use was a one-octave mouth organ concealed under Home's large moustache and that other one-octave mouth organs were found in Home's belongings after his death. According to Randi, author William Lindsay Gresham told Randi "around 1960" that he had seen these mouth organs in the Home collection at the Society for Psychical Research (SPR). Eric J. Dingwall, who catalogued Home's collection on its arrival at the SPR does not record the presence of the mouth organs. According to Peter Lamont, the author of an extensive Home biography, "It is unlikely Dingwall would have missed these or did not make them public."The fraudulent medium Henry Slade also played an accordion while held with one hand under a table. Slade and Home played the same pieces. They had at one time lived near each other in the U.S.A. The magician Chung Ling Soo exposed how Slade had performed the trick.

Randi distinguishes between pseudoscience and crackpot science. He regards most of parapsychology as pseudoscience because of the way in which it is approached and conducted, but nonetheless sees it as a legitimate subject that "should be pursued", and from which real scientific discoveries may develop. Randi regards crackpot science as "equally wrong" as pseudoscience, but with no scientific pretensions.

Despite multiple debunkings, Randi didn't like to be called a "debunker", preferring to call himself a "skeptic" or an "investigator”: 

(...) if you go into a situation calling yourself a debunker then it is as if you have prejudged the topic. It's not neutral or scientific, and it can turn people against you.

Skeptics and magicians Penn & Teller credit Randi and his career as a skeptic for their own careers. During an interview at TAM! 2012, Penn stated that Flim-Flam! was an early influence on him, and said "If not for Randi there would not be Penn & Teller as we are today.":1:40 He went on to say "Outside of my family ... no one is more important in my life. Randi is everything to me.":5:34

At the NECSS skeptic conference in 2017, Randi was asked by George Hrab what a "'skeptic coming of age ceremony' would look like" and Randi talked about what it was like as a child to learn about the speed of light and how that felt like he was looking into the past. Randi stated "More kids need to be stunned".

At The Amaz!ng Meeting in 2011 (TAM 9) the Independent Investigations Group (IIG) organised a tribute to James Randi. The group gathered together with other attendees, put on fake white beards, and posed for a large group photo with Randi. At the CSICon in 2017, in absence of Randi, the IIG organised another group photo with leftover beards from the 2011 photo. After Randi was sent the photo, he replied, "I'm always very touched by any such expression. This is certainly no exception. You have my sincere gratitude. I suspect, however that a couple of those beards were fake. But I'm in a forgiving mood at the moment. I'm frankly very touched. I'll see you at the next CSICon. Thank you all."

Exploring Psychic Powers ... Live television show

Exploring Psychic Powers ... Live was a two-hour television special aired live on June 7, 1989, wherein Randi examined several people claiming psychic powers. Hosted by actor Bill Bixby, the program offered $100,000 (Randi's $10,000 prize plus $90,000 put up by the show's syndicator, LBS Communications, Inc.) to anyone who could demonstrate genuine psychic powers.

An astrologer, Joseph Meriwether, claimed that he was able to ascertain a person's astrological sign after talking with them for a few minutes. He was presented with twelve people, one at a time, each with a different astrological sign. They could not tell Meriwether their astrological sign or birth date, nor could they wear anything that would indicate it. After Meriwether talked to them, he had them go and sit in front of the astrological sign that he thought was theirs. By agreement, Meriwether needed to get ten of the 12 correct, to win. He got none correct.

The next psychic, Barbara Martin, claimed to be able to read auras around people, claiming that auras were visible at least five inches above each person. She selected ten people from a group of volunteers who she said had clearly visible auras. On stage were erected ten screens, numbered 1 through 10, just tall enough to hide the volunteer while not hiding their aura. Unseen by Martin, some of the volunteers positioned themselves behind different screens, then she was invited to predict which screens hid volunteers by seeing their aura above. Since random guessing would be expected to get about five correct, Martin needed to get eight of the ten right. She stated that she saw an aura over all ten screens, but people were behind only four of the screens.

A dowser, Forrest Bayes, claimed that he could detect water, even in a bottle inside a sealed cardboard box. He was shown twenty boxes and asked to indicate which boxes contained a water bottle. He selected eight of the boxes, which he said contained water, but it turned out that only five of the twenty contained water. Of the eight selected boxes, only one was revealed to contain water and one contained sand. It was not revealed whether any of the remaining six boxes contained water.

A psychometric psychic, Sharon McLaren-Straz, claimed to be able to receive personal information about the owner of an object by handling the object itself. In order to avoid ambiguous statements, the psychic agreed to be presented with both a watch and a key from each of twelve different people. She was to match keys and watches to each owner. According to the prior agreement, she had to match at least nine out of the twelve sets, but she succeeded in only two.

Professional crystal healer Valerie Swan attempted to use ESP to identify 250 Zener cards, guessing which of the five symbols was on each one. Random guessing should have resulted in about fifty correct guesses, so it was agreed in advance that Swan had to be right on at least eighty-two cards in order to demonstrate an ability greater than chance. However, she was able to get only fifty predictions correct, which is no better than random guessing.

James Randi Educational Foundation (JREF)

Main article: James Randi Educational Foundation

In 1996, Randi established the James Randi Educational Foundation. Randi and his colleagues publish in JREF's blog, Swift. Topics have included the interesting mathematics of the one-seventh area triangle, a classic geometric puzzle. In his weekly commentary, Randi often gives examples of what he considers the nonsense that he deals with every day.

Beginning in 2003, the JREF annually hosted The Amaz!ng Meeting, a gathering of scientists, skeptics, and atheists. The last meeting was in 2015, coinciding with Randi's retirement from the JREF.

2010s

Randi with skull cane, 2014

Randi began a series of conferences known as "The Amazing Meeting" (TAM) which quickly became the largest gathering of skeptics in the world, drawing audiences from Asia, Europe, South America, and the UK. It also attracted a large percentage of younger attendees. Randi has been regularly featured on many podcasts, including The Skeptics Society's official podcast Skepticality and the Center for Inquiry's official podcast Point of Inquiry. From September 2006 onwards, he has occasionally contributed to The Skeptics' Guide to the Universe podcast with a column titled "Randi Speaks." In addition, The Amazing Show is a podcast in which Randi shares various anecdotes in an interview format.

In 2014, Part2Filmworks released An Honest Liar, a feature film documentary, written by Tyler Measom and Greg O'Toole, and directed and produced by Measom and Justin Weinstein. The film, which was funded through Kickstarter, focuses on Randi's life, his investigations, and his relationship with longtime partner José Alvarez (born Deyvi Orangel Peña Arteaga), to whom he was married in 2013. The film was screened at the Tribeca Film Festival, at Toronto's Hot Docs film festival, and at the June 2014 AFI Docs Festival in Silver Spring, Maryland and Washington, D.C., where it won the Audience Award for Best Feature. It also received positive reviews from critics. The film was featured on the PBS Independent Lens series, shown in the U.S. and Canada, on March 28, 2016.

In 2017, Randi appeared in animated form on Holy Koolaid, in which he discussed the challenge of finding the balance between connecting sincerely with his audience and at the same time tricking/fooling them with an artful ruse and indicated that this is a balance many magicians struggle with.

Since 2013, Randi has been listed on the Advisory Council of the National Center for Science Education.

Views on religion

Randi's parents were members of the Anglican Church but rarely attended services. He attended Sunday School at St. Cuthbert's Church in Toronto a few times as a child, but he independently decided to stop going when he was not answered when he asked for proof of the teachings of the Church.:24:40

In his essay "Why I Deny Religion, How Silly and Fantastic It Is, and Why I'm a Dedicated and Vociferous Bright", Randi, who identifies himself as an atheist, opined that many accounts in religious texts, including the virgin birth, the miracles of Jesus Christ, and the parting of the Red Sea by Moses, are not believable. Randi refers to the Virgin Mary as being "impregnated by a ghost of some sort, and as a result produced a son who could walk on water, raise the dead, turn water into wine, and multiply loaves of bread and fishes" and questions how Adam and Eve "could have two sons, one of whom killed the other, and yet managed to populate the Earth without committing incest". He wrote that, compared to the Bible, "The Wizard of Oz is more believable. And much more fun."

Clarifying his view of atheism, Randi wrote "I've said it before: there are two sorts of atheists. One sort claims that there is no deity, the other claims that there is no evidence that proves the existence of a deity; I belong to the latter group, because if I were to claim that no god exists, I would have to produce evidence to establish that claim, and I cannot. Religious persons have by far the easier position; they say they believe in a deity because that's their preference, and they've read it in a book. That's their right."

In An Encyclopedia of Claims, Frauds, and Hoaxes of the Occult and Supernatural (1995), he examines various spiritual practices skeptically. Of the meditation techniques of Guru Maharaj Ji, he writes "Only the very naive were convinced that they had been let in on some sort of celestial secret." In 2003, he was one of the signers of the Humanist Manifesto.

In a discussion with Kendrick Frazier at CSICon 2016, Randi stated "I think that a belief in a deity is ... an unprovable claim ... and a rather ridiculous claim. It is an easy way out to explain things to which we have no answer.":7:05 He then summarized his current concern with religious belief as follows:

A belief in a god is one of the most damaging things that infests humanity at this particular moment in history.:7:40

One Million Dollar Paranormal Challenge

Main article: One Million Dollar Paranormal Challenge

The James Randi Educational Foundation (JREF) offered a prize of US$1,000,000 to anyone able to demonstrate a supernatural ability under scientific testing criteria agreed to by both sides. Based on the paranormal challenges of John Nevil Maskelyne and Houdini, the foundation began in 1996, when Randi put up $1,000 of his own money payable to anyone who could provide objective proof of the paranormal. The prize money grew to $1,000,000, and had formal published rules. No one progressed past the preliminary test, which was set up with parameters agreed to by both Randi and the applicant. He refused to accept any challengers who might suffer serious injury or death as a result of the testing.

On April 1, 2007, it was ruled that only persons with an established, nationally recognized media profile and the backing of a reputable academic were allowed to apply for the challenge, in order to avoid wasting JREF resources on frivolous claimants.

On Larry King Live, March 6, 2001, Larry King asked claimed medium Sylvia Browne if she would take the challenge and she agreed. Randi appeared with Browne on Larry King Live six months later, and she again appeared to accept his challenge. However, according to Randi, she ultimately refused to be tested, and the Randi Foundation kept a clock on its website recording the number of weeks since Browne allegedly accepted the challenge without following through, until Browne's death in November 2013.

During a subsequent appearance on Larry King Live on June 5, 2001, Randi challenged Rosemary Altea, another claimed medium, to undergo testing for the million dollars, but Altea refused to address the question. Instead Altea replied only, "I agree with what he says, that there are many, many people who claim to be spiritual mediums, they claim to talk to the dead. There are many people, we all know this. There are cheats and charlatans everywhere." On January 26, 2007, Altea and Randi again appeared on the show, and Altea again refused to answer whether or not she would take the One Million Dollar Paranormal Challenge.

In October 2007, claimed psychic John Edward appeared on Headline Prime, hosted by Glenn Beck. When asked if he would take "the Amazing Randi's" challenge, Edward responded, "It's funny. I was on Larry King Live once, and they asked me the same question. And I made a joke , and I'll say the same thing here: Why would I allow myself to be tested by somebody who's got an adjective as a first name?" Beck simply allowed Edward to continue, ignoring the challenge.

Randi asked British businessman Jim McCormick, the inventor of the bogus ADE 651 bomb detector, to take the challenge in October 2008. Randi called the ADE 651 "a useless quack device which cannot perform any other function than separating naive persons from their money. It's a fake, a scam, a swindle, and a blatant fraud. Prove me wrong and take the million dollars." There was no response from McCormick. According to Iraqi investigators, the ADE 651, which was corruptly sold to the Baghdad bomb squad, was responsible for the deaths of hundreds of civilians who died as a result of terrorist bombs which were not detected at checkpoints. On April 23, 2013, McCormick was convicted of three counts of fraud at the Old Bailey in London; he was subsequently sentenced to ten years' imprisonment for his part in the ADE 651 scandal, which Randi was the first to expose.

A public log of past participants in the Million Dollar Challenge exists.
In 2015, the James Randi paranormal challenge was officially terminated due to Randi's retirement from, and thus lack of direct involvement with, the foundation.

Legal disputes

Randi has been involved in a variety of legal disputes but says that he has "never paid even one dollar or even one cent to anyone who ever sued me." However, he says, he has paid out large sums to defend himself in these suits.

Uri Geller

Randi met magician Uri Geller in the early 1970s, and found Geller to be "Very charming. Likable, beautiful, affectionate, genuine, forward-going, handsome — everything!" But Randi viewed Geller as a con-man, and began a long effort to expose him as a fraud. According to Randi, Geller tried to sue him several times, accusing him of libel. Geller never won, save for a ruling in a Japanese court that ordered Randi to pay Geller one-third of one percent of what Geller had requested. This ruling was canceled, and the matter dropped, when Geller decided to concentrate on another legal matter.

 Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Geller v. Randi

In May 1991, Geller sued Randi and CSICOP for $15 million on a charge of slander, after Randi told the International Herald Tribune that Geller had "tricked even reputable scientists" with stunts that "are the kind that used to be on the back of cereal boxes", referring to the old spoon-bending trick. The court dismissed the case and Geller had to settle at a cost to him of $120,000, after Randi produced a cereal box which bore instructions on how to do the spoon-bending trick. Geller's lawyer Don Katz was disbarred mid-way into this action and Geller ended up suing him. After failing to pay before the deadline imposed by the court, Geller was sanctioned an additional $20,000.

Geller sued both Randi and CSICOP. CSICOP argued that the organization was not responsible for Randi's statements. The court agreed that including CSICOP was frivolous and dropped them from the action, leaving Randi to face the action alone, along with the legal costs. Geller was ordered to pay substantial damages, but only to CSICOP. The matter was subsequently settled out of court, and the details of the settlement have been kept confidential. The settlement also included an agreement that Geller would not pursue Randi for the award in the Japanese case or other outstanding cases.

Other cases

In 1993, a jury in the U.S. District Court in Baltimore found Randi liable for defaming Eldon Byrd for calling him a child molester in a magazine story and a "shopping market molester" in a 1988 speech. However, the jury found that Byrd was not entitled to any monetary damages after hearing testimony that he had sexually molested and later married his sister-in-law. The jury also cleared the other defendant in the case, CSICOP.

Late in 1996, Randi launched a libel suit against a Toronto-area psychic named Earl Gordon Curley. Curley had made multiple objectionable comments about Randi on Usenet. Despite suggesting to Randi on Usenet that Randi should sue – Curley's comments implying that if Randi did not sue, then his allegations must be true – Curley seemed entirely surprised when Randi actually retained Toronto's largest law firm and initiated legal proceedings. The suit was eventually dropped in 1998 when Earl Curley died at the age of 51 of "alcohol toxicity."

Allison DuBois, on whose life the television series Medium was based, threatened Randi with legal action for using a photo of her from her website in his December 17, 2004, commentary without her permission. Randi removed the photo and subsequently used a caricature of DuBois when mentioning her on his site, beginning with his December 23, 2005, commentary.

Sniffex, producer of a dowsing bomb detection device, sued Randi and the JREF in 2007 and lost. Sniffex sued Randi for his comments regarding a government test in which the Sniffex device failed. The company was later investigated and charged with fraud.

Personal life

When he hosted his own radio show in the 1960s, Randi lived in a small house in Rumson, New Jersey, that featured a sign on the premises that read: "Randi — Charlatan". In a Fort Lauderdale public library in 1986, Randi, who had recently moved to Florida, met Venezuelan artist José Alvarez (born Deyvi Orangel Peña Arteaga). They eventually moved in together, and were married in Washington on July 2, 2013, with Randi turning 85 the next month. They live in Plantation, Florida.

In 1987, Randi became a naturalized citizen of the United States. Randi has said that one reason he became an American citizen was an incident while he was on tour with Alice Cooper where the Royal Canadian Mounted Police searched the band's lockers during a performance. Nothing illicit or illegal was found, yet the RCMP trashed the room.

In February 2006, Randi underwent coronary artery bypass surgery. In early February 2006, he was declared to be in stable condition and "receiving excellent care" with his recovery proceeding well. The weekly commentary updates to his Web site were made by guests while he was hospitalized. Randi recovered after his surgery and was able to help organize and attend the 2007 Amaz!ng Meeting (T.A.M.) in Las Vegas, Nevada, his annual convention of scientists, magicians, skeptics, atheists and freethinkers.

Randi was diagnosed with colorectal cancer in June 2009. He had a series of small tumors removed from his intestines during laparoscopic surgery. He announced the diagnosis a week later at The Amaz!ng Meeting 7, as well as the fact that he was scheduled to begin chemotherapy in the following weeks. He also said at the conference: "One day, I'm gonna die. That's all there is to it. Hey, it's too bad, but I've got to make room. I'm using a lot of oxygen and such—I think it's good use of oxygen myself, but of course, I'm a little prejudiced on the matter."

Randi underwent his final chemotherapy session on December 31, 2009, later saying that his chemotherapy experience was not as unpleasant as he had imagined it might be. In a video posted April 12, 2010, Randi stated that he had been given a clean bill of health.

In a March 21, 2010, blog entry, Randi came out as gay, a move he said was inspired by seeing the 2008 biographical drama film Milk.

In the 1993 documentary Secrets of the Psychics, Randi stated, "I've never involved myself in narcotics of any kind; I don't smoke; I don't drink, because that can easily just fuzz the edges of my rationality, fuzz the edges of my reasoning powers, and I want to be as aware as I possibly can. That means giving up a lot of fantasies that might be comforting in some ways, but I'm willing to give that up in order to live in an actually real world, as close as I can get to it".

In a video released on October 16, 2017, Randi revealed that he had recently suffered a minor stroke, and that he was under medical advice not to travel during his recovery, so would be unable to attend CSICon 2017 in Las Vegas later that month.

Political views

Randi is a registered Democrat. 

Awards and honors

YearAward or honor

1977 Visiting Magician of the Year, Academy of Magical Arts & Sciences at the Magic Castle in Hollywood.

1978 Garden State Magicians' award.

1981 Asteroid 3163 Randi was named after James Randi, who has always been an active amateur observer. His friend Carl Sagan encouraged his interest.

Certificate of appreciation at the MIT Club of Boston.

Designated Grand Master of Magic by Hocus Pocus Magazine.

1983 Blackstone Cup, International Platform Association as Outstanding Speaker (won again in 1987).

1984 Honorary membership, Bay Surgical Society of Los Angeles.

1986 A $273,000 MacArthur Foundation Fellowship was awarded to James Randi for his investigations of the claims of Uri Geller and TV "faith healers"

Honorary membership, Israeli Society for Promoting the Art of Magic.

1987 Special fellowship, Academy of Magical Arts & Sciences in Los Angeles.

Certificate of Appreciation, Ring 254 of the International Brotherhood of Magicians.

Award of Merit, Assembly 22 of the Society of American Magicians.

1988 National Consumer Service Award, National Council Against Health Fraud.

International Ambassador of Magic, Society of American Magicians.

1989 Joseph A. Burton Forum Award, American Physical Society.

Gold Medal, University of Ghent.

1990 Humanist Distinguished Service Award, American Humanist Association.

Thomas Paine Award, Baton Rouge Proponents of Rational Inquiry & Scientific Methods.

1992 Commemorative Medal with Golden Wreath, Hungarian Society for the Dissemination of Scientific Knowledge.

1996 Distinguished Skeptic Award, Committee for Skeptical Inquiry (CSICOP).

1997 Lifetime Achievement Award, International Brotherhood of Magicians.

"One of the 100 Best People in the World, people who make our lives richer or larger or happier," Esquire magazine.

Award, Science & Engineering Society of the National Security Agency.

1999 "In Defense of Reason" Special Lifetime Achievement Award, Comitato Italiano per il Controllo dell Affermazioni sui Paranormale.

2000 Distinguished Lecturer Award, Nova Southeastern University.

2002 Presidential Citation, International Brotherhood of Magicians.

2003 First Richard Dawkins Award.

2007 Philip J. Klass Award.

2008 Lifetime Achievement Award, Independent Investigations Group (IIG). Previous recipients Carl Sagan and Harry Houdini.

2009 In Praise of Reason Award, Committee for Skeptical Inquiry.

2010 Elected a Committee for Skeptical Inquiry Fellow.

2012 Lifetime Achievement Fellowship, Academy of Magical Arts.

Lifetime Achievement Award, American Humanist Association.

2016 Heinz Oberhummer Award, 2016

Lifetime Achievement Award, Humanist Association of Canada.

James Randi is one of very few members of the UK Magic Circle to be granted their highest order: Member of the Inner Magic Circle With Gold Star (MIMC).

World records

The following are Guinness World Records:

Randi was in a sealed casket underwater for one hour and 44 minutes, breaking the previous record of one hour and 33 minutes set by Harry Houdini on August 5, 1926.

Randi was encased in a block of ice for 55 minutes.

Long version of Audio recorded at CSICon October 2016

Bibliography

Randi, James; Sugar, Bert Randolph (1976). Houdini, His Life and Art. New York: Grosset & Dunlap. ISBN 978-0-448-12552-7. OCLC 3017457.

—— (1982). Flim-Flam!: Psychics, ESP, Unicorns, and Other Delusions. Introduction by Isaac Asimov. Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books. ISBN 978-0-87975-198-2. LCCN 82060953. OCLC 9066769.

—— (1982). Test Your ESP Potential: A Complete Kit With Instructions, Scorecards, and Apparatus. New York: Dover Publications. ISBN 978-0-486-24269-9. OCLC 7924713.

—— (1982) . The Truth About Uri Geller. New York: Prometheus Books. ISBN 978-0-87975-199-9. OCLC 9164994.

—— (1987). The Faith Healers. Foreword by Carl Sagan. Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books. ISBN 978-0-87975-369-6. OCLC 16353426.

—— (1989). The Magic World of the Amazing Randi. Holbrook, MA: Adams Media Corporation. ISBN 978-1-55850-982-5. OCLC 21303371.

—— (1990). The Mask of Nostradamus: The Prophecies of the World's Most Famous Seer. Charles Scribner's Sons. ISBN 978-0-684-19056-3. OCLC 824193656.

—— (1991). James Randi: Psychic Investigator. London: Boxtree Ltd. ISBN 978-1-85283-144-8. OCLC 26359284. Companion book to the Open Media/Granada Television series.

—— (1992). Conjuring: Being a Definitive History of the Venerable Arts of Sorcery, Prestidigitation, Wizardry, Deception, & Chicanery and of the Mountebanks & Scoundrels Who have Perpetrated these Subterfuges on a Bewildered Public, in short, MAGIC! (1st ed.). New York: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0-312-09771-4. OCLC 640909937.

—— (1995). An Encyclopedia of Claims, Frauds, and Hoaxes of the Occult and Supernatural. Introduction by Arthur C. Clarke (1st ed.). New York: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0-312-15119-5. OCLC 35978760. (Online version)

A Magician in the Laboratory (Forthcoming)

Wrong! (Forthcoming)

Television and film

Publicity material for ITV series "James Randi: Psychic Investigator" produced by Open Media in 1991

With guests on ITV series "James Randi: Psychic Investigator" produced by Open Media in 1991

Actor

Good to See You Again, Alice Cooper (1974) as the Dentist/Executioner

Ragtime (1981) (stunt coordinator: Houdini)

Penn & Teller's Invisible Thread (1987) (TV)

Penn & Teller Get Killed (1989) as the 3rd Rope Holder

Beyond Desire (1994) as the Coroner

Himself

Wonderama (1959–1967) (TV) as The Amazing Randi

I've Got a Secret (1965) (TV) as The Amazing Randi

Happy Days – "The Magic Show" (1978) as the Amazing Randi

Zembla, 'De trucs van Char' (The tricks Char uses). (March 2008)

ZDF German TV (2007)

Wild Wild Web (1999)

West 57th (1980s)

Welt der Wunder – Kraft der Gedanken (January 2008)

Today (many appearances)

The Don Lane Show (Australia)

That's My Line (1981) (Appeared with James Hydrick)

The View (ABC) multiple appearances 1997–present

The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson (32 appearances between 1973 and 1993 plus repeats)

The Secret Cabaret (produced by Open Media for Channel 4 in the UK)

The Power of Belief (October 6, 1998) (ABC News Special) (TV)

People are Talking (1980s)

The Patterson Show (1970s)

Superpowers? (an Equinox documentary made by Open Media for Channel 4 in 1990)

After Dark (September 3, 1988, September 9, 1989)

Weird Thoughts, Open Media discussion hosted by Tony Wilson for BBC TV, with Mary Beard and others, 1994

The Art of Magic (1998) (TV)

The Ultimate Psychic Challenge (Discovery Channel/Channel 4) (2003)

Spotlight on James Randi (2002) (TV)

Secrets of the Super Psychics (Channel 4/The Learning Channel), produced by Open Media, 1997/8

Scams, Schemes, and Scoundrels (A&E Special) (March 30, 1997)

RAI TV Italy (1991)

Politically Incorrect with Bill Maher

Penn & Teller: Bullshit! several appearances
"End of the World" (2003) TV Episode

"ESP" (2003) TV Episode

"Signs from Heaven" (2005) TV Episode

The Oprah Winfrey Show 2 episodes

Lawrence Leung's Unbelievable (Australia) TV Episode

Nova: "Secrets of the Psychics" (1993)

Mitä ihmettä? (Finland) (2003) TV Series

Midday (Australia) (1990s)

Magic or Miracle? (1983) TV special

Magic (2004) (mini) TV Series

Larry King Live (CNN) (June 5, 2001, September 3, 2001, January 26, 2007, several more)

James Randi: Psychic Investigator (1991) (Open Media series for the ITV network)

James Randi Budapesten – Hungarian documentary

Inside Edition – (1991, 2006, and 2007) TV

Horizon – "Homeopathy: The Test" (2002) BBC/UK TV Episode

Dead Men Talking (The Biography Channel) (2007)

Fornemmelse for snyd (2003) TV Series (also archive footage) Denmark

Extraordinary People – "The Million Dollar Mind Reader" (September 2008).

Exploring Psychic Powers ... Live (June 7, 1989; hosted by Bill Bixby)

CBS This Morning (1990s)

Anderson Cooper 360°, CNN (January 19, 2007, and January 30, 2007)

A Question of Miracles (HBO) (1999)

20/20 (ABC) (May 11, 2007)

An Honest Liar (2014, aired as Exposed: Magicians, Psychics and Frauds on BBC Storyville)

Other media

One of Martin Gardner's articles about Dr. Irving Joshua Matrix has a note that one of the Doctor's scams, a school supposedly teaching clairvoyance, was exposed thanks to Randi enrolling in the school under an alias. Another article ends with the mention of Randi aiding two investigative reporters in exposing another scam, a supposedly sapient—but actually remotely controlled—robot.

In 2007, Randi delivered a talk at TED in which he discussed psychic fraud, homeopathy, and his foundation's Million Dollar Challenge.

Randi can be heard speaking an introduction on Tommy Finke's song "Poet der Affen/Poet of the Apes" released on the album of the same name in 2010. The message was recorded by Randi and sent to Finke by e-mail.

See also

Pigasus Award

Robert Todd Carroll's Skeptic's Dictionary

List of topics characterized as pseudoscience

Notes

^ A two-minute clip of this documentary with the Geller segment has been widely circulated on the Internet since James Randi acquired permission to use it from NBC, and Carson paid for the expensive and complex transfer from the original, physically degraded, two-inch videotape recording.

^ James Randi discussed obtaining the clip of Uri Geller on The Tonight Show.

^ Regarding his separation from religious training, Randi says that his statements in Sunday school such as "That sounded very unlikely." regarding contradictory and dubious biblical claims, were met with unsatisfactory answers, such as "It's in the Bible. It's in the holy book of God." He was given a note for his parents stating "Your boy Randi ... is not welcome at St. Cuthberts as he asks too many questions and he interrupts the teachers." :24:40

References

^ Phillip Valys (March 26, 2015). "Now you see them: The tricky world of the Amazing Randi and Jose Alvarez". Southflorida.com. Archived from the original on April 11, 2016. Retrieved March 30, 2016.

^ Franceschina, Peter; Burstein, Jon (September 15, 2011). "'The Amazing' Randi, renowned supernatural investigator, immersed in mystery about partner's alleged ID theft". sun-sentinel.com. Sun Sentinel. Retrieved July 15, 2020. 'I'm a magician by trade. I'm an entertainer. That gives me the ability to investigate these people who have supernatural claims,' he said.

^ Frazier, Kendrick (March–April 2017). "Still 'Amazing': A Conversation with James Randi". skepticalinquirer.org. Skeptical Inquirer Vol. 41 No. 2. Retrieved July 15, 2020. I said, 'No, I'm in show biz. I’m a magician, ho, ho, ho. I’m a theatrical character. I work on TV and in theaters and I go out and entertain kids and adults. An entertainer should not be the head of an organization like that.'

^ Garvin, Glenn (September 12, 2017). "The Amazing Randi can escape just about anything — except Hurricane Irma". miamiherald.com. Miami Herald. Retrieved July 15, 2020. 'I’m a magician by trade,' Randi said. 'I'm used to standing in front of huge crowds of people who are all focused on the stage, on me.'

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p Higginbotham, Adam (November 7, 2014). "The Unbelievable Skepticism of the Amazing Randi". The New York Times Magazine. Archived from the original on November 8, 2014. Retrieved November 8, 2014.

^ Sullivan, Walter (July 27, 1988). "Water That Has a Memory? Skeptics Win Second Round". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 13, 2013. Retrieved October 9, 2013.

^ Cohen, Patricia (February 17, 2001). "Poof! You're a Skeptic: The Amazing Randi's Vanishing Humbug". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 20, 2009. Retrieved May 5, 2010.

^ Rodrigues 2010, p. 271

^ a b c Randi, James (February 9, 2007). "More Geller Woo-Woo". Swift (Newsletter). Archived from the original on July 10, 2009. Retrieved December 26, 2016.

^ a b West, Mick (June 13, 2018). "In Defense of Debunkers". CSI. Archived from the original on June 18, 2018. Retrieved March 12, 2019.

^ "One-Million-Dollar Challenge". MIT Media Lab: Affective Computing Group. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Archived from the original on July 27, 2011. Retrieved October 9, 2013.

^ "JREF Status". JREF. Archived from the original on August 30, 2017. Retrieved November 12, 2015.

^ Board of Directors of The James Randi Educational Foundation. "JREF Status". James Randi Educational Foundation. James Randi Educational Foundation. Retrieved October 15, 2016.

^ a b Moritz 1987, p. 455

^ Randi, James (May 9, 2008). "How Wrong Can You Get?". Swift (Blog). JREF. Archived from the original on September 21, 2016. Retrieved June 10, 2016.

^ James Randi at the Magic Castle: In Conversation with Max Maven on YouTube

^ a b c d Orwen, Patricia (August 23, 1986). "The Amazing Randi". Toronto Star. Torstar Corporation. Archived from the original on November 6, 2013. Retrieved October 9, 2013.

^ Malmgren, Jeanne (April 14, 1998). "The 'quack' hunter". St. Petersburg Times. Times researcher Barbara Oliver contributed to this report. St. Petersburg, FL. Archived from the original on March 1, 2011. Retrieved August 19, 2012.

^ Colombo 2004, p. 182

^ Randi 1982c, pp. 230–231. Randi reprints two newspaper columns from the Toronto Evening Telegram of August 28, 1950, and August 14, 1950, by Wessely Hicks about Randall Zwinge's psychic predictions. The earlier column states that "Mr. Zwinge said he first became aware that he possessed Extra Sensory Perception when he was nine years old."

^ Randi 1982a, pp. 61–62

^ Randi, James (May 19, 2006). "Filipino Justice". Swift (Newsletter). Archived from the original on October 7, 2009. Retrieved June 15, 2009.

^ Jaroff, Leon (June 24, 2001). "Fighting Against Flimflam". Time. Archived from the original on September 30, 2007. Retrieved June 18, 2007.

^ a b Taft, Philip B., Jr. (July 5, 1981). "A Charlatan in Pursuit of Truth". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 30, 2017.

^ a b "James Randi: Homeopathy, quackery and fraud". TED. New York: Sapling Foundation. February 2007. Archived from the original on July 19, 2011. Retrieved April 24, 2010. Randi explained in a February 2007 presentation that he believes the word "magician" implies one who has actual magical abilities, whereas a conjurer is one who uses skills to merely play the part of one.

^ Sinclair, Gordon (February 7, 1956). "Television & radio column". Toronto Daily Star.

^ Bryant, George (June 21, 1956). "Handcuffs no problem Toronto-born magician laughs at locksmiths". Toronto Daily Star.

^ a b c d e f g h i j "A Conversation with James Randi". YouTube. Center For Inquiry. Retrieved August 25, 2017.

^ a b Wagg, Jeff (July 10, 2007). "About James Randi Full Bio". JREF. Archived from the original on February 2, 2009. Retrieved October 9, 2013.

^ Butler, Kevin S.; Ingram, Billy. "Wonderama!". TVparty!. Greensboro, NC: William Ingram. Archived from the original on December 30, 2006. Retrieved April 5, 2007. Sonny Fox hosted another 'Wonderama Thanksgiving Day Party' on Thursday afternoon, November 23, 1961 with guests ventriloquist and cartoon voice-over performer Paul Winchell, magician/escape artist and magic historian The Amazing James Randi and folk singer Pat Woodell.

^ Butler, Kevin S. "Bonamo, The Magic Clown". TVparty!. Greensboro, NC: William Ingram. Archived from the original on May 10, 2008. Retrieved May 13, 2008.

^ Barber, Peter W. (December 2003). "Points to Ponder: Another Matter of Ethics". The Linking Ring. 83 (12): 97. ISSN 0024-4023.

^ Joe Gannon (Director) (1974). Good to See You Again, Alice Cooper (Motion picture). General Media International, Inc. OCLC 62534800.(2005 DVD release)

^ "The Amazing Randi". SickthingsUK. Sheffield, South Yorkshire, England: Simon Halley. Archived from the original on November 8, 2007. Retrieved May 18, 2007.

^ Randi, James (May 3, 2002). "Dangerous Stunts". Swift (Newsletter). Archived from the original on June 9, 2007. Retrieved May 18, 2007.

^ Alcock 2001, p. 42

^ Gardner 2000, p. 178

^ "TMC Promotions". January 11, 2013. Archived from the original on July 23, 2015. Retrieved July 22, 2015.

^ a b c "Episode #016, feat. James "The Amaz!ng" Randi - The European Skeptics Podcast". March 30, 2016. Archived from the original on August 7, 2017. Retrieved September 3, 2017.

^ Bartlett, Kay (July 13, 1981). "Truthful trickster". The Milwaukee Journal. Associated Press. Retrieved July 13, 2012.

^ Burt 2001, p. 192

^ a b c "JAMES RANDI – Bio Information" (PDF). JREF. Retrieved December 20, 2010.

^ Randi, James. "Teleportation Magic Established By Science, At Last!". Swift (Blog). JREF. Retrieved January 19, 2011.

^ Asimov 1994

^ Rensberger, Boyce (December 13, 1975). "Magicians Term Israeli 'Psychic' a Fraud". The New York Times. p. 29. Retrieved July 19, 2020.

^ Kernan, Michael (June 11, 1978). "God's Chariot! Science Looks at the New Occult". The Washington Post.

^ a b Charlson, Carl (1993). "Secrets of the Psychics". NOVA. Event occurs at 8'25". PBS.

^ "Geller on the Ropes". March 30, 2007. Archived from the original on July 11, 2009. Retrieved December 22, 2007.

^ Frum, David (2000). How We Got Here: The '70s. New York, New York: Basic Books. p. 132. ISBN 978-0-465-04195-4.

^ Petit, Charles (May 23, 1991). "Bay Magicians Back Uri Geller's Critic". San Francisco Chronicle. p. A27.

^ Levy, Michael (March 13, 1995). "Group Gets $40,000 From 'psychic' Geller Starts Paying Debunkers $120,000". The Buffalo News. Retrieved December 29, 2007.

^ Carroll 2003, p. 313

^ "CSI Fellows and Staff – CSI". Committee for Skeptical Inquiry. Amherst, NY: Center for Inquiry. Archived from the original on July 14, 2013. Retrieved July 23, 2013.

^ "About James Randi". JREF. Archived from the original on July 10, 2009. Retrieved December 29, 2007.

^ Hilts, Philip J. (March 1, 1983). "Magicians Score a Hit On Scientific Researchers". The Washington Post. p. First Section; A1.

^ a b Randi, James (September 22, 2006). "A Look at the Past". Swift (Newsletter). JREF. Archived from the original on July 9, 2009. Retrieved September 20, 2013.

^ James Randi exposes James Hydrick – via YouTube

^ Randi 1987, pp. 139–181

^ Dart, John (May 11, 1986). "Skeptics' Revelations: Faith Healer Receives 'Heavenly' Messages Via Electronic Receiver, Debunkers Charge". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 15, 2012. Retrieved August 18, 2012.

^ James Randi Debunks Peter Popoff Faith Healer – via YouTube

^ Dart, John (September 26, 1987). "Evangelist Popoff Off Air, Files Bankruptcy Petitions". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved August 18, 2012.

^ Crease, Robert P. (2019). The Workshop and the World: What Ten Thinkers Can Teach Us About Science and Authority. W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 9780393292442. The magician James Randi once exposed a popular televangelist by playing recordings of secret transmissions between an audience plant and the televangelist. The televangelist declared bankruptcy the next year.

^ "Secret Footage of 'Faith Healer' Peter Popoff in Toronto May 2011". Think Again! TV. Centre for Inquiry Canada. June 7, 2011 – via YouTube.

^ Mendham, Tim (1988). "The Carlos Hoax" (PDF). The Skeptic. 8 (1). ISSN 0726-9897. OCLC 53994493. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 19, 2013. Retrieved April 19, 2013.

^ "'Carlos' hoax". The Skeptic's Dictionary. Robert Todd Carroll. Archived from the original on June 5, 2009. Retrieved June 15, 2009.

^ Randi, James (May 7, 1998). "James Randi and the Great Carlos". The Correx Archives (Interview). Interviewed by Paul Willis. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on July 15, 2009. Retrieved June 15, 2009.

^ Randi, James (February 18, 2005). "The ABC-TV Infomercial for John of God". Swift (Newsletter). Archived from the original on July 10, 2009. Retrieved November 18, 2006.

^ Randi 1995, "psychic surgery"

^ Randi, James (November 1, 2002). "Reading Records". Swift (Newsletter). Archived from the original on June 20, 2010. Retrieved July 11, 2010.

^ Maddox, John; Randi, James; Stewart, Walter W. (July 28, 1988). High-dilution" experiments a delusion". Nature. 334 (6180): 287–290. doi:10.1038/334287a0. ISSN 1476-4687.

^ Randi 1995, "Home, Daniel Dunglas"

^ Lamont 2005, p. 302

^ Chung Ling Soo. (1898) Slate Writing and Kindred Phenomena. Munn & Company. Scientific American, New York City. pp. 105-106

^ Chung Ling Soo. (1898). Spirit Slate Writing and Kindred Phenomena. Munn & Company. pp. 105-106. "Dr. Henry Slade was, of course, identified and recognized as the principal slate-writing medium, but at various times he presented other phenomena, one of which was the playing of an accordion while held in one hand under the table. The accordion was taken by him from the table with his right hand, at the end containing the strap, the keys or notes at the other end being away from him. He thus held the accordion beneath the table, and his left hand was laid on top of the table, where it was always in plain view. Nevertheless, the accordion was heard to give forth melodious tunes, and at the conclusion was brought up on top of the table as held originally; the whole dodge consisting in turning the accordion end for end as it went under the table. The strap end being now downward, and held between the legs, the medium's hand grasped the keyboard end, and worked the bellows and keys, holding the accordion firmly with the legs and working the hand, not with an arm movement, but mostly by a simple wrist movement. Of course, at the conclusion, the hand grasped the accordion at the strap end, and brought it up in this condition. Sometimes an accordion is tied with strings and sealed so the bellows cannot be worked. This is for the dark séance. Even in this condition the accordion is played by inserting a tube in the air-hole or valve and by the medium's using his lungs as bellows."

^ Randi 1997, p. 170

^ Ripin, Barrett H., ed. (June 1995). "Trio Takes Aim Against Spread of Pseudo-Science". APS News. 4 (6). ISSN 1058-8132. Archived from the original on December 28, 2013. Retrieved October 9, 2013.

^ a b 38 Years of Magic and B.S.: A Conversation with Penn & Teller" - TAM 2012". Youtube.com. James Randi Foundation. Archived from the original on September 6, 2013. Retrieved August 25, 2017.

^ Dobler, Russ (2017). "NECSS 2017: Skepticism Making Connections in Midtown Manhattan". Skeptical Inquirer. 41 (6): 8–9.

^ Gerbic, Susan. "CSICon Photo Tribute to James Randi". www.csicop.org. Retrieved March 6, 2019.

^ Randi, James (July 31, 2003). "Randi_2003-Jul-31.wav". JREF Internet Broadcast Archive (Podcast). Event occurs at 0:33:19. Archived from the original (WAV) on September 7, 2003. Retrieved November 28, 2006.

^ Polidoro 2003, pp. 19–24

^ Randi, James (July 2005). "Fakers and Innocents". Skeptical Inquirer. 29 (4). ISSN 0194-6730. Archived from the original on October 27, 2006. Retrieved October 29, 2006.

^ Brian Dunning (March 19, 2016). "Are you frustrated that TAM & the JREF are no more, and the skeptical community has disintegrated?". Skeptoid blog. Retrieved October 25, 2016.

^ Susan Gerbic (September 22, 2016). "From TAM to CSICon: An Interview with Ray Hall and Katie Dyer". CSI website. CSI. Archived from the original on October 25, 2016. Retrieved October 25, 2016.

^ Chip Denman, Rick Adams. "JREF Status". Archived from the original on August 30, 2017. Retrieved September 25, 2015.

^ "The Amaz!ng Meeting 2012: About". Archived from the original on March 5, 2013. Retrieved September 29, 2017.

^ Frazier, Kendrick (March 2015). "Organized Skepticism: Four Decades ... and Today". Skeptical Inquirer. 39 (2). Archived from the original on October 3, 2016. Retrieved October 25, 2016.

^ Swoopy; Colanduno, Derek (June 28, 2005). "#10 The James Randi Educational Foundation". Skepticality (Podcast). Altadena, CA: The Skeptics Society. Archived from the original on July 8, 2011. Retrieved November 27, 2011.

^ Swoopy; Colanduno, Derek (December 22, 2007). "#67a Xmas 2007". Skepticality (Podcast). Altadena, CA: The Skeptics Society. Archived from the original on July 8, 2011. Retrieved November 27, 2011.

^ "Point of Inquiry". Archived from the original on July 2, 2006. Retrieved June 30, 2006.

^ "The Skeptics' Guide to the Universe". Archived from the original on November 7, 2006. Retrieved October 29, 2006.

^ "The Amazing Show starring James Randi". itricks.com. Archived from the original on February 1, 2014. Retrieved January 22, 2014.

^ a b "An Honest Liar" Archived September 6, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. Yahoo! Movies. Retrieved September 5, 2014.

^ "An Honest Liar: The Amazing Randi Story" Archived July 26, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. Kickstarter. Retrieved September 5, 2014.

^ Barsanti, Chris (April 25, 2014). "Tribeca Film Festival 2014: 'An Honest Liar' + 'In Order of Disappearance'" Archived April 28, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. PopMatters.

^ Teplitsky, Ariel (May 1, 2014). "Worth a look: An Honest Liar" Archived September 29, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. Toronto Star.

^ Rooney, David (June 30, 2014). "'An Honest Liar': Provincetown Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 6, 2014.

^ "An Honest Liar (2014)". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on September 6, 2014. Retrieved September 5, 2014.

^ Brioux, Bill (March 28, 2016). "Toronto's James (The Amazing) Randi profiled in An Honest Liar". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on September 29, 2017. Retrieved March 29, 2016.

^ "Magician James Randi on the Importance of Skepticism". Holy Koolaid. September 2, 2017. Archived from the original on September 2, 2017. Retrieved September 2, 2017.

^ "Advisory Council". ncse.com. National Center for Science Education. July 15, 2008. Archived from the original on August 10, 2013. Retrieved October 30, 2018.

^ Brown, Christopher (September 13, 2010). "MTS: Meet James Randi". Meet the Skeptics!. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved January 22, 2014.

^ Holy Koolaid (August 31, 2017), The Magician James Randi on the Importance of Skepticism, archived from the original on July 5, 2018, retrieved September 2, 2017

^ a b Randi, James (August 5, 2005). "Our Stance on Atheism". Swift (Newsletter). Archived from the original on July 10, 2009. Retrieved January 27, 2011.

^ Randi, James (July 25, 2003). "Why I Deny Religion, How Silly and Fantastic It Is, and Why I'm a Dedicated and Vociferous Bright". Swift (Newsletter). Archived from the original on October 7, 2009. Retrieved October 9, 2013.

^ Randi 1995, "Maharaj Ji"

^ "Notable Signers". Humanism and Its Aspirations. Washington, D.C.: American Humanist Association. Archived from the original on October 5, 2012. Retrieved September 28, 2012.

^ a b Poulsen, Kevin (January 12, 2007). "Skeptic Revamps $1M Psychic Prize". Wired. San Francisco. Archived from the original on August 31, 2008. Retrieved April 11, 2008.

^ "Rules and Guidelines". JREF. Retrieved November 28, 2012.

^ Edward, John; Jaroff, Leon; Browne, Sylvia; Van Praagh, James; Boteach, Shmuley; Kurtz, Paul; Van Zandt, Clint; Graff, Dale (March 6, 2001). "Are Psychics for Real?". Larry King Live (Interview). Interviewed by Larry King. CNN. Archived from the original on December 23, 2013. Retrieved October 9, 2013.

^ Randi, James; Browne, Sylvia (September 3, 2001). "Are Psychics Real?". Larry King Live (Interview). Interviewed by Larry King. CNN. Archived from the original on October 27, 2006. Retrieved August 18, 2006.

^ "The Sylvia Browne Clock". JREF. Retrieved October 9, 2013.

^ a b Altea, Rosemary; Randi, James (June 5, 2001). "Spiritual Medium Versus Paranormal Skeptic". Larry King Live (Interview). Interviewed by Larry King. CNN. Archived from the original on April 6, 2013. Retrieved October 9, 2013.

^ Altea, Rosemary; Randi, James (January 26, 2007). "The Controversy Swirling Around Psychic Sylvia Brown and Her Inaccurate Read on a Now Famous Kidnapping Victim". Larry King Live (Interview). Interviewed by Larry King. CNN. Archived from the original on February 3, 2007. Retrieved February 2, 2007.

^ Beck, Glenn (October 27, 2006). "John Edward Shares Insights into His Career". CNN. Archived from the original on April 7, 2014.

^ Randi, James (2008). "A Direct, Specific, Challenge From James Randi and the JREF". Swift (Blog). JREF. Archived from the original on January 23, 2010. Retrieved October 9, 2013.

^ de Bruxelles, Simon; August, Oliver (November 28, 2009). "Iraqis spent $80m on ADE651 bomb detectors described as useless". The Times. London. Retrieved January 22, 2010.

^ Nordland, Rod (November 3, 2009). "Iraq Swears by Bomb Detector U.S. Sees as Useless". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 15, 2011. Retrieved October 9, 2013.

^ "James McCormick guilty of selling fake bomb detectors". BBC News. London. April 23, 2013. Archived from the original on October 8, 2013. Retrieved October 9, 2013.

^ Pasternack, Alex (March 21, 2013). "Motherboard". Archived from the original on September 29, 2017. Retrieved September 29, 2017.

^ Booth, Robert (May 2, 2013). "Fake bomb detector conman jailed for 10 years". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on October 4, 2013. Retrieved October 9, 2013.

^ "Challenge Applications". International Skeptics Forum. Archived from the original on June 19, 2016. Retrieved June 10, 2016.

^ "The Million Dollar Challenge". JREF. Archived from the original on September 4, 2017. Retrieved September 3, 2017.

^ Truzzi, Marcello. "An End to the Uri Geller vs. Randi & CSICOP Litigations?". UriGeller.com. Archived from the original on December 8, 2012. Retrieved October 9, 2013.

^ Margolis, Jonathan (1999). Uri Geller: Magician or Mystic?. Orion Books. ISBN 978-1566490252.

^ Thompson, Tracy (August 29, 1991). "A Case of Mind Over Matter". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on October 5, 2017. Retrieved September 29, 2017.

^ Cacho, Flavio (August 1, 2008). "How does Uri Geller do it?". Blogger. Archived from the original on September 29, 2017.

^ "Uri Geller Libel Suit Dismissed". Committee for Skeptical Inquiry. Amherst, NY: Center for Inquiry. August 1994. Archived from the original on December 5, 2006. Retrieved June 3, 2007.

^ "Lawsuit Against CSICOP Dismissed". The Skeptic Tank. San Clementa, CA: Fredric L. Rice. Archived from the original on October 7, 2007. Retrieved June 3, 2007.

^ West, Norris P. (June 5, 1993). "Magician defamed scientist, jury rules". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on November 9, 2014.

^ "Randi Found Guilty of Defamation". The Miami Herald. June 9, 1993. Retrieved April 20, 2009.

^ Randi, James (December 4, 1996). "Action initiated ..." James Randi Educational Foundation Info List. Archived from the original on September 25, 2006. Retrieved October 29, 2006.

^ Randi, James (July 8, 1998). "Curley Confirmation + Sony Corp. and ESP, More on Theremin". James Randi Educational Foundation Info List. Archived from the original on March 28, 2007. Retrieved October 29, 2006.

^ Randi, James (December 17, 2004). "Another Medium Well Done". Swift (Newsletter). Archived from the original on December 30, 2006. Retrieved October 29, 2006.

^ Randi, James; Hatchman, Paul (December 23, 2005). "Medium Well Done". Swift (Newsletter). Archived from the original on February 29, 2012. Retrieved September 20, 2013.

^ a b Randi, James (July 25, 2008). "An Encouraging Development". Swift (Blog). JREF. Archived from the original on August 22, 2008. Retrieved October 29, 2008.

^ Coyne, Jerry A. (July 12, 2013). "Randi got married". Why Evolution is True (Blog). Archived from the original on October 17, 2013. Retrieved October 9, 2013.

^ "Live Blogging Tam Day Two (Friday)". The Skeptical Abyss (Blog). July 12, 2013. Archived from the original on November 3, 2013. Retrieved October 9, 2013.

^ "Testimonial letters to Judge Hurley".

^ Sturgess, Kylie (March/April 2015). "Behind the Magic: An Interview with James Randi". Skeptical Inquirer Volume 39 Number 2, pp. 38–42.

^ Randi, James (September 17, 2001). "Commentary: Vapid Vultures, Conrad Comments, Grodin Goof, Sleuth Sylvia, Nostradamus Notes, Etc". Swift (Newsletter). Archived from the original on September 23, 2001. Retrieved October 29, 2006.

^ Randi, James (July 15, 2005). "On the Soap Box". Swift (Newsletter). Archived from the original on July 17, 2005. Retrieved May 18, 2007.

^ Randi, James; Wagg, Jeff (February 10, 2006). "Randi Update". Swift (Newsletter). Archived from the original on February 15, 2006. Retrieved May 18, 2007.

^ Bidlack, Hal (February 17, 2006). "Randi Update, The Big Tent, In Closing ..." Swift (Newsletter). Archived from the original on December 31, 2006. Retrieved October 29, 2006.

^ Randi, James (February 2, 2007). "In Conclusion ..." Swift (Newsletter). Archived from the original on July 9, 2009. Retrieved October 29, 2007.

^ a b Thorp, Brandon K. (January 12, 2010). "Randi On (and Off) Chemotherapy". Swift (Blog). JREF. Archived from the original on July 8, 2014. Retrieved July 23, 2013.

^ a b Mooney, Michael J. (August 26, 2009). "The Demystifying Adventures of the Amazing Randi". SF Weekly. San Francisco, CA: Village Voice Media. Archived from the original on July 14, 2015. Retrieved September 5, 2009. Lengthy article which reported: "He has intestinal cancer and may not have long to live."

^ James Randi Speaks Homeopathy Week 2010 on YouTube

^ Randi, James (March 21, 2010). "How To Say It?". Swift (Blog). JREF. Retrieved October 9, 2013.

^ Grothe, D. J. (March 21, 2010). "James Randi – A Skeptic Comes Out at 81". For Good Reason (Podcast). JREF. Archived from the original on June 28, 2014. Retrieved June 10, 2016.

^ "Secrets of the Psychics", 10'45".

^ Randi, James. "Video message to CSICon attendees". Facebook. CSICon - Skeptical Inquirer Conference. Retrieved October 17, 2017.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y "About James Randi". James Randi Educational Foundation. James Randi Educational Foundation. Archived from the original on November 28, 2016. Retrieved August 24, 2017.

^ "(3163) Randi". IAU Minor Planet Center. Retrieved January 22, 2020.

^ "James Randi". MacArthur Foundation. Chicago, IL: John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation. Retrieved August 19, 2012.

^ "Joseph A. Burton Forum Award". College Park, MD: American Physical Society. Archived from the original on December 2, 2008. Retrieved June 15, 2009.

^ "CSICOP Award Winners". Skeptical Inquirer. 20 (5): 7. 1996.

^ Randi, James (March 23, 2007). "In Closing". Swift (Newsletter). Archived from the original on March 26, 2007. Retrieved May 18, 2007.

^ "The 2008 IIG Awards". The Independent Investigations Group. Hollywood, CA: Independent Investigations Group. August 21, 2010. Archived from the original on July 13, 2011. Retrieved July 1, 2011.

^ Bupp, Nathan (January 12, 2010). "Sixteen Notable Figures in Science and Skepticism Elected CSI Fellows" (Press release). Amherst, NY: Committee for Skeptical Inquiry. Archived from the original on February 2, 2010. Retrieved February 12, 2010.

^ McMaster, Shawn (April 2, 2012). "The Academy of Magical Arts Awards Results". The Mandala. Shawn McMaster. Archived from the original on April 8, 2012. Retrieved April 6, 2012.

^ Magee, Brian (May 23, 2012). "Atheists 'Marching' to New Orleans for 71st Annual American Humanist Association Conference" (Press release). Washington, D.C.: American Humanist Association. Archived from the original on October 9, 2013. Retrieved October 9, 2013.

^ "Heinz Oberhummer Award geht an James Randi". Technische Universität Wien. November 3, 2016. Archived from the original on December 3, 2016.

^ Randi, James. "May 31, 2016". Facebook: James Randi. Facebook. Retrieved August 24, 2017.

^ "Members". The Magic Circle. Archived from the original on July 25, 2015. Retrieved July 25, 2015.

^ "The Magic Show". Happy Days. Season 6. Episode 13. December 5, 1978. ABC. Archived from the original on October 4, 2013. Retrieved October 9, 2013.

^ "De trucs van Char, het medium – 23 maart 2008". Archived from the original on March 24, 2008. Retrieved 2009-01-01.

^ TCM Archived April 19, 2015, at the Wayback Machine and Online Video Guide Archived April 15, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved April 15, 2015

^ List of After Dark editions

^ "Weird Thoughts ". EOFFTV. Archived from the original on February 19, 2005. Retrieved April 15, 2015.

^ "The Million Dollar Mind Reader". Extraordinary People. November 23, 2011. Channel 5. Archived from the original on January 4, 2012. Retrieved June 15, 2009.

^ Randi, James (January 19, 2007). "Psychic Powers Debunked in Shawn Hornbeck Case?". Anderson Cooper 360° (Interview). Interviewed by Anderson Cooper. CNN. Archived from the original on May 14, 2012. Retrieved June 30, 2012.

^ Rossi, Linda; Randi, James (January 30, 2007). "Psychic Reality Check". Anderson Cooper 360° (Interview). Interviewed by Anderson Cooper. CNN. Archived from the original on May 14, 2012. Retrieved June 30, 2012.

^ Avila, Jim; Ruppel, Glenn; Hunter, Donna (May 11, 2007). "Selling Salvation?". 20/20. ABC. Archived from the original on December 28, 2013. Retrieved August 24, 2013.

^ Poet der Affen / Poet of the Apes on YouTube

Further reading

Alcock, James (2001). "Science vs. Pseudoscience, Nonscience, and Nonsense". In Kurtz, Paul (ed.). Skeptical Odysseys: Personal Accounts by the World's Leading Paranormal Inquirers. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books. ISBN 978-1-57392-884-7. OCLC 45821233.

Asimov, Isaac (1994). "Trap Door Spiders". I. Asimov: A Memoir (1st ed.). New York: Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-553-56997-1. LCCN 93008644. OCLC 32012202.

Burt, Daniel S. (2001). The Biography Book: A Reader's Guide to Nonfiction, Fictional, and Film Biographies of More Than 500 of the Most Fascinating Individuals of All Time. Westport, CT: Oryx Press. ISBN 978-1-57356-256-0. OCLC 44502070.

Carroll, Robert Todd (2003). The Skeptic's Dictionary: A Collection of Strange Beliefs, Amusing Deceptions, and Dangerous Delusions. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-27242-7. OCLC 52086432.

Colombo, John Robert, ed. (2004). The Midnight Hour: Canadian Accounts of Eerie Experiences. Dundurn Press. ISBN 978-1-55002-496-8. OCLC 53847365.

Gardner, Martin (2000). Did Adam and Eve have Navels: Discourses on Reflexology, Numerology, Urine Therapy, and Other Dubious Subjects. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-04963-3. OCLC 44076017.

Lamont, Peter (2005). The First Psychic: The Peculiar Mystery of a Notorious Victorian Wizard. London: Little, Brown. p. 302. ISBN 978-0-316-72834-8. OCLC 62176762.

Moritz, Charles, ed. (1987). Current Biography Yearbook, 1987. 48. New York: H. W. Wilson Company. OCLC 17332312.

Moseley, James W.; Pflock, Karl T. (2002). Shockingly Close to the Truth! Confessions of a Grave-Robbing Ufologist. New York: Prometheus Books. ISBN 978-1-57392-991-2. OCLC 48942361.

Polidoro, Massimo (2003). Secrets of the Psychics: Investigating Paranormal Claims. Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books. ISBN 978-1-59102-086-8. OCLC 52312569.

Randi, James (1997). "Science and Pseudoscience". In Terzian, Yervant; Bilson, Elizabeth (eds.). Carl Sagan's Universe. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-57286-6. LCCN 96040511. OCLC 36130681.

Rodrigues, Luís F. (2010). Open Questions: Diverse Thinkers Discuss God, Religion, and Faith. Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger. ISBN 978-0-313-38644-2. LCCN 2010011195. OCLC 548555665.

External links

James Randiat Wikipedia's sister projects

Media from Wikimedia Commons

Quotations from Wikiquote

Texts from Wikisource

Data from Wikidata

Official website

Listings

James Randi in the Skeptic's Dictionary

James Randi on IMDb

Works by or about James Randi in libraries (WorldCat catalog)

Media

James Randi interview (May 2009) from the podcast of MagicNewswire.com in which Randi discusses his career in magic, his feud with Uri Geller and more.

James Randi interview (November 2007) from the BSAlert.com radio show where Randi discusses NBC's Phenomenon TV show, the current status of Uri Geller and his thoughts about whether society is becoming more or less superstitious.

"Homeopathy: The Test – webchat with James Randi". BBC. November 26, 2002.

"20 Major Aspects of Liars, Cheats, and Frauds" by James Randi"

v

t

e

James Randi

The Amazing Randi

Books 
The Truth About Uri Geller

Flim-Flam!

The Faith Healers

The Mask of Nostradamus

Conjuring

An Encyclopedia of Claims, Frauds, and Hoaxes of the Occult and Supernatural

Related articles 
James Randi Educational Foundation (The Amazing Meeting)

One Million Dollar Paranormal Challenge

3163 Randi

Pigasus Award

Committee for Skeptical Inquiry

An Honest Liar

Authority control 
BIBSYS: 90195278

BNF: cb123126934 (data)

GND: 123344905

ISNI: 0000 0000 8096 4133

LCCN: n80062980

NDL: 00798425

NLK: KAC201732516

NTA: 074447440

SUDOC: 032017243

VIAF: 17290510

 WorldCat Identities: lccn-n80062980
