American actress

Jane Fonda

Fonda at the 2015 Cannes Film Festival

Born Jane Seymour Fonda

(1937-12-21) December 21, 1937 (age 82)

New York City, New York, U.S.

Alma mater Vassar College

Occupation Actress

writer

activist

fashion model

businesswoman

author

Years active 1954–1990,

2005–present

Political party Democratic

Spouse(s) Roger Vadim

​

(m. 1965; div. 1973)

Tom Hayden

​

(m. 1973; div. 1990)

Ted Turner

​

(m. 1991; div. 2001)

Partner(s) Richard Perry (2009–2017)

Children 3, including Troy Garity and Mary Williams (de facto adopted)

Parent(s) Henry Fonda

Frances Ford Seymour

Relatives Peter Fonda (brother)

Bridget Fonda (niece)

Jane Seymour Fonda (born December 21, 1937) is an American actress, political activist, and former fashion model. She is the recipient of various accolades including two Academy Awards, two BAFTA Awards, seven Golden Globe Awards, a Primetime Emmy Award, the AFI Life Achievement Award, and the Honorary Golden Lion.

Born to actor Henry Fonda and socialite Frances Ford Seymour, Fonda made her acting debut with the 1960 Broadway play There Was a Little Girl, for which she received a nomination for the Tony Award for Best Featured Actress in a Play, and made her screen debut later the same year with the romantic comedy Tall Story. She rose to prominence in the 1960s with such films as Period of Adjustment (1962), Sunday in New York (1963), Cat Ballou (1965), Barefoot in the Park (1967), and Barbarella (1968). Her first husband was Barbarella director Roger Vadim. A seven-time Academy Award nominee, she received her first nomination for They Shoot Horses, Don't They? (1969), and went on to win the Academy Award for Best Actress twice in the 1970s, for Klute (1971) and Coming Home (1978). Her other nominations were for Julia (1977), The China Syndrome (1979), On Golden Pond (1981), and The Morning After (1986). Consecutive hits Fun with Dick and Jane (1977), California Suite (1978), The Electric Horseman (1979), and 9 to 5 (1980) sustained Fonda's box-office drawing power, and she won a Primetime Emmy Award for her performance in the TV film The Dollmaker (1984).

In 1982, she released her first exercise video, Jane Fonda's Workout, which became the highest-selling VHS of all time. It would be the first of 22 such videos over the next 13 years, which would collectively sell over 17 million copies. Divorced from her second husband Tom Hayden, she married billionaire media mogul Ted Turner in 1991 and retired from acting, following a row of commercially unsuccessful films concluded by Stanley & Iris (1990). Fonda divorced Turner in 2001 and returned to the screen with the hit Monster-in-Law (2005). Although Georgia Rule (2007) was the star's only other movie during the 2000s, in the early 2010s she fully re-launched her career. Subsequent films have included The Butler (2013), This Is Where I Leave You (2014), Youth (2015), Our Souls at Night (2017), and Book Club (2018). In 2009, she returned to Broadway after a 49-year absence from the stage, in the play 33 Variations which earned her a nomination for the Tony Award for Best Actress in a Play, while her major recurring role in the HBO drama series The Newsroom (2012–14) earned her two Primetime Emmy Award nominations. She also released another five exercise videos between 2009 and 2012. Fonda currently stars as Grace Hanson in the Netflix comedy series Grace and Frankie, which debuted in 2015 and has earned her nominations for a Primetime Emmy Award and three Screen Actors Guild Awards.

Fonda was a visible political activist in the counterculture era during the Vietnam War. She was photographed sitting on a North Vietnamese anti-aircraft gun on a 1972 visit to Hanoi, during which she gained the nickname "Hanoi Jane". During this time she was effectively blacklisted in Hollywood. She has also protested the Iraq War and violence against women, and describes herself as a feminist and environmental activist. In 2005, along with Robin Morgan and Gloria Steinem, she co-founded the Women's Media Center, an organization that works to amplify the voices of women in the media through advocacy, media and leadership training, and the creation of original content. Fonda serves on the board of the organization.

Contents

1 Early life and education

2 Acting career

2.1 Career beginnings (1950s–1962)

2.2 Rise to prominence (1963–1969)

2.3 Resurgence and critical acclaim (1970–1979)

2.4 Continued box office success, exercise videos, retirement (1980–1990)

2.5 Return and new career prospects (2005–present)

3 Political activism

3.1 Opposition to the Vietnam War

3.1.1 Visit to Hanoi

3.1.2 Regrets

3.1.3 Subject of government surveillance

3.1.4 1970 arrest

3.2 Feminist causes

3.3 Native Americans

3.4 Israeli–Palestinian conflict

3.5 Opposition to the Iraq War

3.6 Fonda and Kerry

3.7 Environmentalism

4 Writing

5 Charitable work

6 Personal life

6.1 Relationships

6.2 Faith

6.3 Health

7 Awards and honors

8 Filmography

9 See also

10 References

10.1 Bibliography

11 External links

Early life and education

Fonda aged five with her father, actor Henry Fonda (1943)

Jane Seymour Fonda was born in New York City on December 21, 1937. Her parents were Canadian-born socialite Frances Ford Brokaw (née Seymour; 1908–1950) and American actor Henry Fonda (1905–1982). According to her father, the surname Fonda came from an Italian ancestor who immigrated to the Netherlands in the 1500s. There, he intermarried; the resultant family began to use Dutch given names, with Jane's first Fonda ancestor reaching New York in 1650. Fonda also has English, French, and Scottish ancestry. She was named for the third wife of Henry VIII, Jane Seymour, to whom she is distantly related on her mother's side. Her brother, Peter (1940–2019), was also an actor, and her maternal half-sister is Frances de Villers Brokaw (also known as "Pan"), whose daughter is Pilar Corrias, the owner of the Pilar Corrias Gallery in London.

In 1950, when Fonda was 12, her mother died by suicide while undergoing treatment at Craig House psychiatric hospital in Beacon, New York. Later that year, Henry Fonda married the socialite Susan Blanchard (born 1928), 23 years his junior; this marriage ended in divorce. Aged 15, Jane taught dance at Fire Island Pines, New York.

Fonda attended Greenwich Academy in Greenwich, Connecticut; the Emma Willard School in Troy, New York; and Vassar College in Poughkeepsie, New York. Before her acting career, she was a model and appeared twice on the cover of Vogue.

Acting career

Career beginnings (1950s–1962)

Fonda became interested in acting as a teenager while appearing with her father in a charity performance of The Country Girl at the Omaha Community Playhouse. After dropping out of Vassar, she went to Paris for six months to study art. Upon returning to the US, in 1958, she met Lee Strasberg; the meeting changed the course of her life. Fonda said, "I went to the Actors Studio and Lee Strasberg told me I had talent. Real talent. It was the first time that anyone, except my father – who had to say so – told me I was good. At anything. It was a turning point in my life. I went to bed thinking about acting. I woke up thinking about acting. It was like the roof had come off my life!"

Fonda's stage work in the late 1950s laid the foundation for her film career in the 1960s. She averaged almost two movies a year throughout the decade, starting in 1960 with Tall Story, in which she recreated one of her Broadway roles as a college cheerleader pursuing a basketball star, played by Anthony Perkins. Frequent collaborator Robert Redford also made his debut in that film. Period of Adjustment and Walk on the Wild Side followed in 1962. The latter, in which she played a prostitute, earned her a Golden Globe for Most Promising Newcomer.

Rise to prominence (1963–1969)

Fonda as Eileen Tyler in Sunday in New York, one of her earliest box office successes

In 1963, she appeared in Sunday in New York. Newsday called her "the loveliest and most gifted of all our new young actresses". However, she also had detractors – in the same year, the Harvard Lampoon named her the "Year's Worst Actress" for The Chapman Report. Fonda's career breakthrough came with Cat Ballou (1965), in which she played a schoolmarm-turned-outlaw. This comedy Western received five Oscar nominations, with Lee Marvin winning best actor, and was one of the year's top ten films at the box office. It was considered by many to have been the film that brought Fonda to bankable stardom. The following year, she had a starring role in The Chase opposite Robert Redford, in their first film together, and two-time Oscar winner Marlon Brando. The film received some positive reviews, but Fonda's performance was noticed by Variety magazine: "Jane Fonda, as Redford's wife and the mistress of wealthy oilman James Fox, makes the most of the biggest female role." After this came the comedies Any Wednesday (1966), opposite Jason Robards and Dean Jones, and Barefoot in the Park (1967), again co-starring Redford.

In 1968, she played the title role in the science fiction spoof Barbarella, which established her status as a sex symbol. In contrast, the tragedy They Shoot Horses, Don't They? (1969) won her critical acclaim and marked a significant turning point in her career; Variety magazine wrote, "Fonda, as the unremittingly cynical loser, the tough and bruised babe of the Dust Bowl, gives a dramatic performance that gives the film a personal focus and an emotionally gripping power." In addition, renowned film critic Pauline Kael, in her New Yorker review of the film, noted of Fonda: " has been a charming, witty nudie cutie in recent years and now gets a chance at an archetypal character. Fonda goes all the way with it, as screen actresses rarely do once they become stars. She doesn't try to save some ladylike part of herself, the way even a good actress like Audrey Hepburn does, peeping at us from behind "vulgar" roles to assure us she's not really like that. Fonda stands a good chance of personifying American tensions and dominating our movies in the seventies as Bette Davis did in the thirties." For her performance, she won the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress and earned her first Oscar nomination for Best Actress. Fonda was very selective by the end of the decade, turning down lead roles in Rosemary's Baby and Bonnie and Clyde.

Resurgence and critical acclaim (1970–1979)

In the seventies, Fonda enjoyed her most critically acclaimed period as an actress despite some setbacks for her ongoing activism. According to writer and critic Hilton Als, her performances starting with They Shoot Horses, Don't They? "heralded a new kind of acting: for the first time, she was willing to alienate viewers, rather than try to win them over. Fonda's ability to continue to develop her talent is what sets her apart from many other performers of her generation.

Fonda won her first Academy Award for Best Actress in 1971, again playing a prostitute, the gamine Bree Daniels, in Alan J. Pakula's murder mystery Klute. Prior to shooting, Fonda spent time interviewing several prostitutes and madams. Years later, Fonda discovered that "there was like a marriage, a melding of souls between this character and me, this woman that I didn't think I could play because I didn't think I was call girl material. It didn't matter." Upon its release, Klute was both a critical and commercial success, and Fonda's performance earned her widespread recognition. Pauline Kael wrote:

"As an actress,  has a special kind of smartness that takes the form of speed; she's always a little ahead of everybody, and this quicker beat – this quicker responsiveness – makes her more exciting to watch. This quality works to great advantage in her full-scale, definitive portrait of a call girl in Klute. It's a good, big role for her, and she disappears into Bree, the call girl, so totally that her performance is very pure – unadorned by "acting." She never stands outside Bree, she gives herself over to the role, and yet she isn't lost in it—she's fully in control, and her means are extraordinarily economical. She has somehow got to a plane of acting at which even the closest closeup never reveals a false thought and, seen on the movie streets a block away, she's Bree, not Jane Fonda, walking toward us. There isn't another young dramatic actress in American films who can touch her".

Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times also praised Fonda's performance, even suggesting that the film should have been titled Bree after her character: "What is it about Jane Fonda that makes her such a fascinating actress to watch? She has a sort of nervous intensity that keeps her so firmly locked into a film character that the character actually seems distracted by things that come up in the movie." During the 1971–1972 awards season, Fonda dominated the Best Actress category at almost every major awards ceremony; in addition to her Oscar win, she received her first Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture - Drama, her first National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Actress and her second New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress.

Between Klute in 1971 and Fun With Dick and Jane in 1977, Fonda did not have a major film success. She appeared in A Doll's House (1973), Steelyard Blues and The Blue Bird (1976). In the former, some critics felt Fonda was miscast, but her work as Nora Helmer drew praise, and a review in The New York Times opined, "Though the Losey film is ferociously flawed, I recommend it for Jane Fonda's performance. Beforehand, it seemed fair to wonder if she could personify someone from the past; her voice, inflections, and ways of moving have always seemed totally contemporary. But once again she proves herself to be one of our finest actresses, and she's at home in the 1870s, a creature of that period as much as of ours." From comments ascribed to her in interviews, some have inferred that she personally blamed the situation on anger at her outspoken political views: "I can't say I was blacklisted, but I was greylisted." However, in her 2005 autobiography, My Life So Far, she rejected such simplification. "The suggestion is that because of my actions against the war my career had been destroyed ... But the truth is that my career, far from being destroyed after the war, flourished with a vigor it had not previously enjoyed." She reduced acting because of her political activism providing a new focus in her life. Her return to acting in a series of 'issue-driven' films reflected this new focus.

Jane Fonda did an extraordinary job with her part. She is a splendid actress with a strong analytical mind which sometimes gets in her way, and with an incredible technique and control of emotion; she can cry at will, on cue, mere drops or buckets, as the scene demands ... I thought Jane well deserved the Oscar she should have got.

—Fred Zinnemann

director of Julia (1977)

In 1972, Fonda starred as a reporter alongside Yves Montand in Tout Va Bien, directed by Jean-Luc Godard and Jean-Pierre Gorin. The two directors then made Letter to Jane, in which the two spent nearly an hour discussing a news photograph of Fonda.

Through her production company, IPC Films, she produced films that helped return her to star status. The 1977 comedy film Fun With Dick and Jane is generally considered her "comeback" picture. Critical reaction was mixed, but Fonda's comic performance was praised; Vincent Canby of The New York Times remarked, "I never have trouble remembering that Miss Fonda is a fine dramatic actress but I'm surprised all over again every time I see her do comedy with the mixture of comic intelligence and abandon she shows here." Also in 1977, she portrayed the playwright Lillian Hellman in Julia, receiving positive reviews from critics. Gary Arnold of The Washington Post described her performance as "edgy, persuasive and intriguingly tensed-up," commenting further, "Irritable, intent and agonizingly self-conscious, Fonda suggests the internal conflicts gnawing at a talented woman who craves the self-assurance, resolve and wisdom she sees in figures like Julia and Hammett." For her performance, Fonda won her first BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role, her second Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama, and received her third Best Actress Oscar nomination.

During this period, Fonda announced that she would make only films that focused on important issues, and she generally stuck to her word. She turned down An Unmarried Woman because she felt the part was not relevant. In 1978, Fonda was at a career peak after she won her second Best Actress Oscar for her role as Sally Hyde, a conflicted adulteress in Coming Home, the story of a disabled Vietnam War veteran's difficulty in re-entering civilian life. Upon its release, the film was a popular success with audiences, and generally received good reviews; Ebert noted that her Sally Hyde was "the kind of character you somehow wouldn't expect the outspoken, intelligent Fonda to play," and Jonathan Rosenbaum of the San Diego Reader felt that Fonda was "a marvel to watch; what fascinates and involves me in her performance are the conscientious effort and thought that seem to go into every line reading and gesture, as if the question of what a captain's wife and former cheerleader was like became a source of endless curiosity and discovery for her." Her performance also earned her a third Golden Globe Award for Best Actress as well, making this her second consecutive win. Also in 1978, she reunited with Alan J. Pakula to star in his post-modern Western drama Comes a Horseman as a hard-bitten rancher, and later took on a supporting role in California Suite, where she played a Manhattan workaholic and divorcee. Variety noted that she "demonstrates yet another aspect of her amazing range" and Time Out New York remarked that she gave "another performance of unnerving sureness."

She won her second BAFTA Award for Best Actress in 1979 with The China Syndrome, about a cover-up of a vulnerability in a nuclear power plant. Cast alongside Jack Lemmon and Michael Douglas, in one of his early roles, Fonda played a clever, ambitious television news reporter. Vincent Canby, writing for The New York Times, singled out Fonda's performance for praise: "The three stars are splendid, but maybe Miss Fonda is just a bit more than that. Her performance is not that of an actress in a star's role, but that of an actress creating a character that happens to be major within the film. She keeps getting better and better." This role also earned her Oscar and Golden Globe nominations for Best Actress. The same year, she starred in the western adventure-romance film The Electric Horseman with her frequent co-star, Robert Redford. Although the film received mixed reviews, The Electric Horseman was a box office success, becoming the eleventh highest-grossing film of 1979 after grossing a domestic total of nearly $62 million.

Continued box office success, exercise videos, retirement (1980–1990)

Fonda and photographer Alan Light following the 62nd Academy Awards in 1990

In 1980, Fonda starred in 9 to 5 with Lily Tomlin and Dolly Parton. The film was a huge critical and box office success, becoming the second highest-grossing release of the year. Fonda had long wanted to work with her father, hoping it would help their strained relationship. She achieved this goal when she purchased the screen rights to the play On Golden Pond, specifically for her father and her. The father-daughter rift depicted on screen closely paralleled the real-life relationship between the two Fondas; they eventually became the first father-daughter duo to earn Oscar nominations (Jane earned her first Best Supporting Actress Oscar nomination) for their roles in the same film. On Golden Pond, which also starred four-time Oscar winner Katharine Hepburn, brought Henry Fonda his only Academy Award for Best Actor, which Jane accepted on his behalf, as he was ill and could not leave home. He died five months later.

Fonda continued to appear in feature films throughout the 1980s, winning an Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress for The Dollmaker (1984), and starring in the role of Dr. Martha Livingston in Agnes of God (1985). The following year, she played an alcoholic actress and murder suspect in the 1986 thriller The Morning After, opposite Jeff Bridges. In preparation for her role, Fonda modelled the character on the starlet Gail Russell, who, at 36, was found dead in her apartment, among empty liquor bottles. Writing for The New Yorker, Pauline Kael commended Fonda for giving "a raucous-voiced, down-in-the-dirty performance that has some of the charge of her Bree in Klute, back in 1971." For her performance, she was nominated for yet another Academy Award for Best Actress.

She ended the decade by appearing in Old Gringo. This was followed by the romantic drama Stanley & Iris (1990) with Robert De Niro, which was her final film for 15 years. Both films did not fare well at the box office, and despite receiving mixed to negative reviews, Fonda's performance as the widowed Iris in the latter was praised by Vincent Canby, who stated, "Fonda's increasingly rich resources as an actress are evident in abundance here. They even overcome one's awareness that just beneath Iris's frumpy clothes, there is a firm, perfectly molded body that has become a multi-million-dollar industry."

For many years Fonda took ballet class to keep fit, but after fracturing her foot while filming The China Syndrome, she was no longer able to participate. To compensate, she began participating in aerobics and strengthening exercises under the direction of Leni Cazden. The Leni Workout became the Jane Fonda Workout, which began a second career for her, continuing for many years. This was considered one of the influences that started the fitness craze among baby boomers, then approaching middle age. In 1982, Fonda released her first exercise video, titled Jane Fonda's Workout, inspired by her best-selling book, Jane Fonda's Workout Book. Jane Fonda's Workout became the highest selling home video of the next few years, selling over a million copies. The video's release led many people to buy the then-new VCR in order to watch and perform the workout at home. The exercise videos were produced and directed by Sidney Galanty, who helped to put the deal together with video distributor Stuart Karl, of Karl Home Video. Galanty produced the first video and 11 more after that. She would subsequently release 23 workout videos with the series selling a total of 17 million copies combined, more than any other exercise series. She released five workout books and thirteen audio programs, through 1995. After a fifteen-year hiatus, she released two new fitness videos on DVD in 2010, aiming at an older audience.

Return and new career prospects (2005–present)

Fonda in 1998

In 1991, after three decades in film, Fonda announced her retirement from the film industry. In May 2005, she returned to the screen with the box office success Monster-in-Law, starring opposite Jennifer Lopez. Two years later, Fonda starred in the Garry Marshall-directed drama Georgia Rule alongside Felicity Huffman and Lindsay Lohan. Georgia Rule was panned by critics, but A. O. Scott of The New York Times felt the film belonged to Fonda and co-star Lohan, before writing, "Ms. Fonda's straight back and piercing eyes, the righteous jaw line she inherited from her father and a reputation for humorlessness all serve her well here, but it is her warmth and comic timing that make Georgia more than a provincial scold."

In 2009, Fonda returned to Broadway for the first time since 1963, playing Katherine Brandt in Moisés Kaufman's 33 Variations. In a mixed review, Ben Brantley of The New York Times praised Fonda's "layered crispness" and her "aura of beleaguered briskness that flirts poignantly with the ghost of her spiky, confrontational screen presence as a young woman. For those who grew up enthralled with Ms. Fonda's screen image, it's hard not to respond to her performance here, on some level, as a personal memento mori." The role earned her a Tony nomination for Best Performance by a Leading Actress in a Play.

Fonda filmed her second movie in French when she had a leading role in the 2011 drama All Together. The same year she starred alongside Catherine Keener in Peace, Love and Misunderstanding, playing a hippie grandmother. In 2012, Fonda began a recurring role as Leona Lansing, CEO of a major media company, in HBO's original political drama The Newsroom. Her role continued throughout the show's three seasons, and Fonda received two Emmy nominations for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series.

In 2013, Fonda had a small role in The Butler, portraying First Lady Nancy Reagan. She had more film work the following year, appearing in the comedies Better Living Through Chemistry and This is Where I Leave You. She also voiced a character on The Simpsons. She played an acting diva in Paolo Sorrentino's Youth in 2015, for which she earned a Golden Globe Award nomination. She also appeared in Fathers and Daughters (2015) with Russell Crowe.

Fonda appears as the co-lead in the Netflix series Grace and Frankie. She and Lily Tomlin play aging women whose husbands reveal they are in love. Filming on the first season was completed in November 2014, and the show premiered online on May 8, 2015. In 2016, Fonda voiced Shuriki in Elena and the Secret of Avalor.

In June 2016, the Human Rights Campaign released a video in tribute to the victims of the 2016 Orlando gay nightclub shooting; in the video, Fonda and others told the stories of the people killed there.

Fonda starred in her fourth collaboration with Robert Redford in the 2017 romantic drama film Our Souls at Night. The film and Fonda's performance received critical acclaim upon release. In 2018, she starred opposite Diane Keaton, Mary Steenburgen, and Candice Bergen in the romantic comedy film Book Club. Although opened to mixed reviews, the film was a major box office success grossing $93.4 million against a $10 million budget, despite releasing the same day as Deadpool 2.

Fonda is the subject of an HBO original documentary entitled Jane Fonda in Five Acts, directed by the documentarian Susan Lacy. Receiving rave reviews, it covers Fonda's life from childhood through her acting career and political activism and then to the present day. It premiered on HBO on September 24, 2018.

Political activism

During the 1960s, Fonda engaged in political activism in support of the Civil Rights Movement, and in opposition to the Vietnam War. Fonda's visits to France brought her into contact with leftist French intellectuals who were opposed to war, an experience that she later characterized as "small-c communism". Along with other celebrities, she supported the Alcatraz Island occupation by American Indians in 1969, which was intended to call attention to the failures of the government with regards to treaty rights and the movement for greater Indian sovereignty.

She supported Huey Newton and the Black Panthers in the early 1970s, stating: "Revolution is an act of love; we are the children of revolution, born to be rebels. It runs in our blood." She called the Black Panthers "our revolutionary vanguard ... we must support them with love, money, propaganda and risk." She has been involved in the feminist movement since the 1970s and dovetails her activism in support of civil rights.

Opposition to the Vietnam War

See also: Opposition to the Vietnam War and RITA Resistance Inside the Armies § Jane Fonda and RITA

Fonda at an anti-Vietnam War conference in the Netherlands in January 1975

In April 1970, Fonda, with Fred Gardner and Donald Sutherland formed the FTA tour ("Free The Army", a play on the troop expression "Fuck The Army"), an anti-war road show designed as an answer to Bob Hope's USO tour. The tour, described as "political vaudeville" by Fonda, visited military towns along the West Coast, aiming to establish a dialogue with soldiers about their upcoming deployments to Vietnam. The dialogue was made into a movie (F.T.A.) which contained strong, frank criticism of the war by servicemen and servicewomen; it was released in 1972.

On May 4, 1970, Fonda appeared before an assembly at the University of New Mexico, in Albuquerque, to speak on GI rights and issues. The end of her presentation was met with a discomfiting silence until Beat poet Gregory Corso staggered onto the stage. Drunk, Corso challenged Fonda, using a four-letter expletive: why hadn't she addressed the shooting of four students at Kent State by the Ohio National Guard, which had just taken place? Fonda in her autobiography revisited the incident: "I was shocked by the news and felt like a fool." On the same day, she joined a protest march on the home of university president Ferrel Heady. The protesters called themselves "They Shoot Students, Don't They?" – a reference to Fonda's recently released film, They Shoot Horses, Don't They?, which had just been screened in Albuquerque.

In the same year, Fonda spoke out against the war at a rally organized by Vietnam Veterans Against the War (VVAW) in Valley Forge, Pennsylvania. She offered to help raise funds for VVAW and was rewarded with the title of Honorary National Coordinator. On November 3, 1970, Fonda started a tour of college campuses on which she raised funds for the organization. As noted by The New York Times, Fonda was a "major patron" of the VVAW.

Visit to Hanoi

Jane Fonda on the NVA anti-aircraft gun

Between 1965 and 1972, almost 300 Americans – mostly civil rights activists, teachers, and pastors – traveled to North Vietnam to see firsthand the war situation with the Vietnamese. News media in the United States predominantly provided a U.S. viewpoint, and American travelers to Vietnam were routinely harassed upon their return to the States. Fonda also visited Vietnam, traveling to Hanoi in July 1972 to witness firsthand the bombing damage to the dikes. After touring and photographing dike systems in North Vietnam, she said the United States had been intentionally targeting the dike system along the Red River. Columnist Joseph Kraft, who was also touring North Vietnam, said he believed the damage to the dikes was incidental and was being used as propaganda by Hanoi, and that, if the U.S. Air Force were "truly going after the dikes, it would do so in a methodical, not a harum-scarum way". Sweden's ambassador to Vietnam, however, observed the bomb damage to the dikes and described it as "methodic". Other journalists reported that the attacks were "aimed at the whole system of dikes".

Fonda was photographed seated on a North Vietnamese anti-aircraft gun; the photo outraged a number of Americans, and earned her the nickname "Hanoi Jane". In her 2005 autobiography, she wrote that she was manipulated into sitting on the battery; she had been horrified at the implications of the pictures. In a 2011 entry at her official website, Fonda explained:

It happened on my last day in Hanoi. I was exhausted and an emotional wreck after the 2-week visit ... The translator told me that the soldiers wanted to sing me a song. He translated as they sung. It was a song about the day 'Uncle Ho' declared their country's independence in Hanoi's Ba Dinh Square. I heard these words: 'All men are created equal; they are given certain rights; among these are life, Liberty and Happiness.' These are the words Ho pronounced at the historic ceremony. I began to cry and clap. 'These young men should not be our enemy. They celebrate the same words Americans do.' The soldiers asked me to sing for them in return ... I memorized a song called 'Day Ma Di', written by anti-war South Vietnamese students. I knew I was slaughtering it, but everyone seemed delighted that I was making the attempt. I finished. Everyone was laughing and clapping, including me ... Here is my best, honest recollection of what happened: someone (I don't remember who) led me towards the gun, and I sat down, still laughing, still applauding. It all had nothing to do with where I was sitting. I hardly even thought about where I was sitting. The cameras flashed ... It is possible that it was a set up, that the Vietnamese had it all planned. I will never know. But if they did I can't blame them. The buck stops here. If I was used, I allowed it to happen ... a two-minute lapse of sanity that will haunt me forever ... But the photo exists, delivering its message regardless of what I was doing or feeling. I carry this heavy in my heart. I have apologized numerous times for any pain I may have caused servicemen and their families because of this photograph. It was never my intention to cause harm.

Fonda made radio broadcasts on Hanoi Radio throughout her two-week tour, describing her visits to villages, hospitals, schools, and factories that had been bombed, and denouncing U.S. military policy. During the course of her visit, Fonda visited American prisoners of war (POWs), and brought back messages from them to their families. When stories of torture of returning POWs were later being publicized by the Nixon administration, Fonda said that those making such claims were "hypocrites and liars and pawns", adding about the prisoners she visited, "These were not men who had been tortured. These were not men who had been starved. These were not men who had been brainwashed." In addition, Fonda told The New York Times in 1973, "I'm quite sure that there were incidents of torture ... but the pilots who were saying it was the policy of the Vietnamese and that it was systematic, I believe that's a lie." Her visits to the POW camp led to persistent and exaggerated rumors which were repeated widely, and continued to circulate on the Internet decades later. Fonda, as well as the named POWs, have denied the rumors, and subsequent interviews with the POWs showed these allegations to be false—the persons named had never met Fonda.

In 1972, Fonda helped fund and organize the Indochina Peace Campaign, which continued to mobilize antiwar activists in the US after the 1973 Paris Peace Agreement, until 1975 when the United States withdrew from Vietnam.

Because of her tour of North Vietnam during wartime and the subsequent rumors, resentment against her persists among some veterans and serving U.S. military. For example, when a U.S. Naval Academy plebe ritually shouted out "Goodnight, Jane Fonda!", the entire company of midshipmen plebes, who had not yet been born when Fonda protested against the Vietnam War, replied "Goodnight, bitch!" This practice has since been prohibited by the academy's Plebe Summer Standard Operating Procedures. In 2005, Michael A. Smith, a U.S. Navy veteran, was arrested for disorderly conduct in Kansas City, Missouri, after he spat chewing tobacco in Fonda's face during a book-signing event for her autobiography, My Life So Far. He told reporters that he "consider it a debt of honor", adding "she spit in our faces for 37 years. It was absolutely worth it. There are a lot of veterans who would love to do what I did." Fonda refused to press charges.

Regrets

In a 1988 interview with Barbara Walters, Fonda expressed regret for some of her comments and actions, stating:

I would like to say something, not just to Vietnam veterans in New England, but to men who were in Vietnam, who I hurt, or whose pain I caused to deepen because of things that I said or did. I was trying to help end the killing and the war, but there were times when I was thoughtless and careless about it and I'm very sorry that I hurt them. And I want to apologize to them and their families. ... I will go to my grave regretting the photograph of me in an anti-aircraft gun, which looks like I was trying to shoot at American planes. It hurt so many soldiers. It galvanized such hostility. It was the most horrible thing I could possibly have done. It was just thoughtless.

In a 60 Minutes interview on March 31, 2005, Fonda reiterated that she had no regrets about her trip to North Vietnam in 1972, with the exception of the anti-aircraft-gun photo. She stated that the incident was a "betrayal" of American forces and of the "country that gave me privilege". Fonda said, "The image of Jane Fonda, Barbarella, Henry Fonda's daughter ... sitting on an enemy aircraft gun was a betrayal ... the largest lapse of judgment that I can even imagine." She later distinguished between regret over the use of her image as propaganda and pride for her anti-war activism: "There are hundreds of American delegations that had met with the POWs. Both sides were using the POWs for propaganda ... It's not something that I will apologize for." Fonda said she had no regrets about the broadcasts she made on Radio Hanoi, something she asked the North Vietnamese to do: "Our government was lying to us and men were dying because of it, and I felt I had to do anything that I could to expose the lies and help end the war."

Subject of government surveillance

In 2013, it was revealed that Fonda was one of approximately 1,600 Americans whose communications between 1967 and 1973 were monitored by the United States National Security Agency (NSA) as part of Project MINARET, a program that some NSA officials have described as "disreputable if not downright illegal". Fonda's communications, as well as those of her husband, Tom Hayden, were intercepted by Britain's Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ). Under the UKUSA Agreement, intercepted data on Americans were sent to the U.S. government.

1970 arrest

On November 3, 1970, Fonda was arrested by authorities at Cleveland Hopkins International Airport on suspicion of drug trafficking. Her luggage was searched when she re-entered the United States after participating in an anti-war college speaking tour in Canada, and several small baggies containing pills were seized. Although Fonda protested that the pills were harmless vitamins, she was booked by police and then released on bond. Fonda alleged that the arresting officer told her he was acting on direct orders from the Nixon White House. As she wrote in 2009, "I told them what  were but they said they were getting orders from the White House. I think they hoped this 'scandal' would cause the college speeches to be canceled and ruin my respectability." After lab tests confirmed the pills were vitamins, the charges were dropped with little media attention.

Fonda's mugshot from the arrest, in which she raises her fist in a sign of solidarity, has since become a widely published image of the actress. It was used as the poster image for the 2018 HBO documentary on Fonda, "Jane Fonda in Five Acts", with a giant billboard sporting the image erected in Times Square in September 2018. In 2017, she began selling merchandise with her mugshot image to benefit the Georgia Campaign for Adolescent Power & Potential.

Feminist causes

In early March 2017, in an interview with Brie Larson, published by People magazine, Fonda stated, "One of the great things the women's movement has done is to make us realise that (rape and abuse is) not our fault. We were violated and it's not right." She said, "I've been raped, I've been sexually abused as a child and I've been fired because I wouldn't sleep with my boss." She said, "I always thought it was my fault; that I didn't do or say the right thing. I know young girls who've been raped and didn't even know it was rape. They think, 'It must have been because I said 'no' the wrong way.'"

Through her work, Fonda said she wants to help abuse victims "realize that  is not our fault". Fonda said that her difficult past led her to become such a passionate activist for women's rights. The actress is an active supporter of the V-Day movement, which works to stop violence against women and girls. In 2001, she established the Jane Fonda Center for Adolescent Reproductive Health, which aims to help prevent teen pregnancy. She was a victim of the "disease to please" in her early life, which plagued many American females of her generation. Fonda revealed in 2014 that her mother, Frances Ford Seymour, was recurrently sexually abused as young as eight, and this may have led to her suicide when Jane was 12.

Fonda on the cover of Ms. magazine in 2006

Fonda has been a longtime supporter of feminist causes, including V-Day, a movement to stop violence against women, inspired by the off-Broadway hit The Vagina Monologues, of which she is an honorary chairperson. She was at the first summit in 2002, bringing together founder Eve Ensler, Afghan women oppressed by the Taliban, and a Kenyan activist campaigning to save girls from genital mutilation.

In 2001, she established the Jane Fonda Center for Adolescent Reproductive Health at Emory University in Atlanta to help prevent adolescent pregnancy through training and program development.

On February 16, 2004, Fonda led a march through Ciudad Juárez, with Sally Field, Eve Ensler and other women, urging Mexico to provide sufficient resources to newly appointed officials in helping investigate the murders of hundreds of women in the rough border city. In 2004, she also served as a mentor to the first all-transgender cast of The Vagina Monologues.

In the days before the September 17, 2006 Swedish elections, Fonda went to Sweden to support the new political party Feministiskt initiativ in their election campaign.

In My Life So Far, Fonda stated that she considers patriarchy to be harmful to men as well as women. She also states that for many years, she feared to call herself a feminist, because she believed that all feminists were "anti-male". But now, with her increased understanding of patriarchy, she feels that feminism is beneficial to both men and women, and states that she "still loves men", adding that when she divorced Ted Turner, she felt like she had also divorced the world of patriarchy, and was very happy to have done so.

In April 2016, Fonda said that while she was 'glad' that Bernie Sanders was running, she predicted Hillary Clinton would become the first female president, whose win Fonda believed would result in a "violent backlash". Fonda went on to say that we need to "help men understand why they are so threatened – and change the way we view masculinity."

Native Americans

Fonda went to Seattle, in 1970 to support a group of Native Americans who were led by Bernie Whitebear. The group had occupied part of the grounds of Fort Lawton, which was in the process of being surplussed by the United States Army and turned into a park. The group was attempting to secure a land base where they could establish services for the sizable local urban Indian population, protesting that "Indians had a right to part of the land that was originally all theirs." The endeavor succeeded and the Daybreak Star Cultural Center was constructed in the city's Discovery Park.

In addition to environmental reasons, Fonda has been a critic of oil pipelines because of their being built without consent on Native American Land. In 2017, Fonda responded to American President Donald Trump's mandate to resume construction of the controversial North Dakota Pipelines by saying that Trump "does this illegally because he has not gotten consent from the tribes through whose countries this goes" and pointing out that "the U.S. has agreed to treaties that require them to get the consent of the people who are affected, the indigenous people who live there."

Israeli–Palestinian conflict

In December 2002, Fonda visited Israel and the West Bank as part of a tour focusing on stopping violence against women. She demonstrated with Women in Black against Israel's occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip outside the residence of Israel's Prime Minister. She later visited Jewish and Arab doctors, and patients at a Jerusalem hospital, followed by visits to Ramallah to see a physical rehabilitation center and Palestinian refugee camp. She was heckled by three members of Women in Green as she arrived to meet with leading Israeli feminists.

In September 2009, she was one of more than 1,500 signatories to a letter protesting the 2009 Toronto International Film Festival's spotlight on Tel Aviv. The protest letter said that the spotlight on Tel Aviv was part of "the Israeli propaganda machine" because it was supported in part by funding from the Israeli government and had been described by the Israeli Consul General Amir Gissin as being part of a Brand Israel campaign intended to draw attention away from Israel's conflict with the Palestinians. Other signers included actor Danny Glover, musician David Byrne, journalist John Pilger, and authors Alice Walker, Naomi Klein, and Howard Zinn.

Rabbi Marvin Hier of the Simon Wiesenthal Center stated that "People who support letters like this are people who do not support a two-state solution. By calling into question the legitimacy of Tel Aviv, they are supporting a one-state solution, which means the destruction of the State of Israel." Hier continued, saying that "it is clear that the script  are reading from might as well have been written by Hamas."

Fonda, in The Huffington Post, said she regretted some of the language used in the original protest letter and how it "was perhaps too easily misunderstood. It certainly has been wildly distorted. Contrary to the lies that have been circulated, the protest letter was not demonizing Israeli films and filmmakers." She continued, writing "the greatest 're-branding' of Israel would be to celebrate that country's long standing, courageous and robust peace movement by helping to end the blockade of Gaza through negotiations with all parties to the conflict, and by stopping the expansion of West Bank settlements. That's the way to show Israel's commitment to peace, not a PR campaign. There will be no two-state solution unless this happens." Fonda emphasized that she, "in no way, support the destruction of Israel. I am for the two-state solution. I have been to Israel many times and love the country and its people." Several prominent Atlanta Jews subsequently signed a letter to The Huffington Post rejecting the vilification of Fonda, who they described as "a strong supporter and friend of Israel".

Opposition to the Iraq War

See also: Opposition to the Iraq War

Fonda argued that the military campaign in Iraq will turn people all over the world against America, and asserted that a global hatred of America would result in more terrorist attacks in the aftermath of the war. In July 2005, Fonda announced plans to make an anti-war bus tour in March 2006 with her daughter and several families of military veterans, saying that some war veterans she had met while on her book tour had urged her to speak out against the Iraq War. She later canceled the tour due to concerns that she would divert attention from Cindy Sheehan's activism.

In September 2005, Fonda was scheduled to join British politician and anti-war activist George Galloway at two stops on his U.S. book tour—Chicago, and Madison, Wisconsin. She canceled her appearances at the last minute, citing instructions from her doctors to avoid travel following recent hip surgery.

On January 27, 2007, Fonda participated in an anti-war rally and march held on the National Mall in Washington, D.C., declaring that "silence is no longer an option". She spoke at an anti-war rally earlier that day at the Navy Memorial, where members of the organization Free Republic picketed in a counter protest.

Fonda and Kerry

In the 2004 presidential election, her name was used as a disparaging epithet against John Kerry, a former VVAW leader, who was then the Democratic Party presidential candidate. Republican National Committee Chairman Ed Gillespie called Kerry a "Jane Fonda Democrat". Kerry's opponents also circulated a photograph showing Fonda and Kerry in the same large crowd at a 1970 anti-war rally, though they sat several rows apart. A faked composite photograph, which gave a false impression that the two had shared a speaker's platform, was also circulated.

Environmentalism

In 2015, Fonda expressed disapproval of President Barack Obama's permitting of Arctic drilling (Petroleum exploration in the Arctic) at the Sundance Film Festival. In July, she marched in a Toronto protest called the "March for Jobs, Justice, and Climate", which was organized by dozens of nonprofits, labor unions, and environmental activists, including Canadian author Naomi Klein. The march aimed to show businesses and politicians alike that climate change is inherently linked to issues that may seem unrelated.

In addition to issues of civil rights, Fonda has been an opponent of oil developments and their adverse effects on the environment. In 2017, while on a trip with Greenpeace to protest oil developments, Fonda criticized Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau saying at the summit on climate change in Paris, known as the Paris agreement, Trudeau "talked so beautifully of needing to meet the requirements of the climate treaty and to respect and hold to the treaties with indigenous people ... and yet he has betrayed every one of the things he committed to in Paris."

In October 2019, Fonda was arrested three times in consecutive weeks protesting climate change outside the United States Capitol in Washington, D.C. She was arrested with members of the group Oil Change International on October 11, with Grace and Frankie co-star Sam Waterston on October 18, and with actor Ted Danson on October 25. On November 1, Fonda was arrested for the fourth consecutive Friday; also arrested were Catherine Keener and Rosanna Arquette. On December 5 Fonda explained her position in a New York Times op-ed.

Writing

Jane Fonda at a book signing, 2005

On April 5, 2005, Random House released Fonda's autobiography My Life So Far. The book describes her life as a series of three acts, each thirty years long, and declares that her third "act" will be her most significant, partly because of her commitment to the Christian religion, and that it will determine the things for which she will be remembered.

Fonda's autobiography was well received by book critics and noted to be "as beguiling and as maddening as Jane Fonda herself" in its review in The Washington Post, calling her a "beautiful bundle of contradictions". The New York Times called the book "achingly poignant".

In January 2009, Fonda started chronicling her Broadway return in a blog with posts about topics ranging from her Pilates class to fears and excitement about her new play. She uses Twitter and has a Facebook page.

In 2011, Fonda published a new book: Prime Time: Love, health, sex, fitness, friendship, spirit – making the most of all of your life. It offers stories from her own life as well as from the lives of others, giving her perspective on how to better live what she calls "the critical years from 45 and 50, and especially from 60 and beyond".

Charitable work

Fonda's charitable works have focused on youth and education, adolescent reproductive health, environment, human services, and the arts.

Fonda marketed her highly-successful line of exercise videos and books in order to fund the Campaign for Economic Democracy, a California lobbying organization she founded with her second husband Tom Hayden in 1978.

Fonda has established the Georgia Campaign for Adolescent Power and Potential (GCAPP) in the mid 1990s and the Fonda Family Foundation in the late 1990s. In the mid 2000s, Fonda founded the Jane Fonda Foundation in 2004 with one million dollars of her own money as a charitable corporation with herself as president, chair, director and secretary; Fonda contributes 10 hours each week on its behalf. In 2017, she began selling merchandise featuring her 1970 arrest mugshot on her website, the proceeds of which benefit GCAPP.

Personal life

Relationships

Fonda and her first husband Roger Vadim in Rome, in 1967 during the filming of Barbarella (1968).

Jane Fonda has been married and divorced three times. She married her first husband, the French film director Roger Vadim, on August 14, 1965 at the Dunes Hotel in Las Vegas. The couple had a daughter, Vanessa Vadim, born on September 28, 1968 in Paris and named after the actress and activist Vanessa Redgrave.

On January 19, 1973, three days after obtaining a divorce from Vadim in Santo Domingo, Fonda married activist Tom Hayden in a free-form ceremony at her home in Laurel Canyon. Their son, Troy O'Donovan Garity, was born on July 7, 1973 in Los Angeles and was given his paternal grandmother's maiden name, as the names "Fonda and Hayden carried too much baggage". Fonda and Hayden named their son after Nguyen Van Troi. Hayden chose O'Donovan as the middle name after the Irish revolutionary Jeremiah O'Donovan Rossa. In 1982, Fonda and Hayden unofficially adopted an African-American teenager, Mary Luana Williams (known as Lulu), whose parents were Black Panthers. Fonda and Hayden divorced on June 10, 1990 in Santa Monica.

Fonda and her third husband Ted Turner on the red carpet at the 1992 Emmy Awards

Fonda married her third husband, the cable television tycoon and CNN founder Ted Turner, on December 21, 1991, at a ranch near Capps, Florida, about 20 miles east of Tallahassee. The pair divorced on May 22, 2001 in Atlanta.

In 2009, Fonda began a relationship with the record producer Richard Perry. It ended in 2017.

In a 2018 interview, Fonda stated that up to the age of 62, she always felt she had to seek the validation of men in order to prove to herself that she had value as a person, something she attributes to the early death of her mother's leaving her without a female role model. As a consequence, she attached herself to "alpha males", some of whom reinforced her feelings of inadequacy, despite her professional success. Fonda said that she came to see that attitude as a failing of the men in her life: "Some men have a hard time realizing that the woman they're married to is strong and smart and they have to diminish that, because it makes them feel diminished. Too bad we have defined masculinity in such a way that it's so easily shamed."

Faith

Fonda grew up atheist but turned to Christianity in the early 2000s. She describes her beliefs as being "outside of established religion" with a more feminist slant and views God as something that "lives within each of us as Spirit (or soul)." She practices zazen and yoga.

Health

As a child, Fonda suffered from a poor self-image and lacked confidence in her appearance, an issue exacerbated by her father Henry Fonda. About that, Fonda said:

I was raised in the '50s. I was taught by my father  that how I looked was all that mattered, frankly. He was a good man, and I was mad for him, but he sent messages to me that fathers should not send: Unless you look perfect, you're not going to be loved.

In adulthood, Fonda developed bulimia, which took a toll on her quality of life for many years, an issue that also affected her mother Frances Ford Seymour, who died by suicide when Fonda was 12. On the subject of her recovery from bulimia, Fonda said,

It was in my 40s, and if you suffer from bulimia, the older you get, the worse it gets. It takes longer to recover from a bout ... I had a career, I was winning awards, I was supporting nonprofits, I had a family. I had to make a choice: I live or I die.

Fonda was diagnosed with breast cancer and osteoporosis in her later years. She underwent a lumpectomy in November 2010 and recovered. In April 2019, Fonda revealed she had had a cancerous growth removed from her lower lip the previous year and pre-melanoma growths removed from her skin.

Awards and honors

Main article: List of awards and nominations received by Jane Fonda

Fonda backstage with actress Thora Birch before being honored at the 2015 Hollywood Film Awards

In 1962, Fonda was given the honorary title of "Miss Army Recruiting" by the Pentagon.

In 1981, she was awarded the Women in Film Crystal Award.

In 1994, the United Nations Population Fund made Fonda a Goodwill Ambassador. In 2004, she was awarded the Women's eNews 21 Leaders for the 21st Century award as one of Seven Who Change Their Worlds. In 2007, Fonda was awarded an Honorary Palme d'Or by Cannes Film Festival President Gilles Jacob for career achievement. Only three others had received such an award – Jeanne Moreau, Alain Resnais, and Gérard Oury.

In December 2008, Fonda was inducted into the California Hall of Fame, located at The California Museum for History, Women and the Arts. In November and December 2009, she received the National German Sustainability Award and New York Women's Agenda Lifetime Achievement Award. She was also selected as the 42nd recipient (2014) of the AFI Life Achievement Award. In 2017, she received a Goldene Kamera lifetime achievement award.

She was one of fifteen women selected to appear on the cover of the September 2019 issue of British Vogue, by guest editor Meghan, Duchess of Sussex.

In 2019, she was inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame.

Filmography

Main article: Jane Fonda filmography

See also

Biography portal

New York City portal

New York (state) portal

Film portal

Television portal

United States portal

List of actors with Academy Award nominations

List of actors with two or more Academy Award nominations in acting categories

List of actors with two or more Academy Awards in acting categories

List of awards and nominations received by Jane Fonda

References

^ Davidson, Bill (1990). Jane Fonda: An Intimate Biography. Dutton. p. 39. ISBN 9780525248880. Jane was christened Jane Seymour Fonda and, as a child, was known as Lady Jane by her mother and everyone else.

^ a b "Jane Fonda Biography: Actress (1937–)". Biography.com (FYI / A&E Networks). Retrieved March 2, 2017.

^ Jane Fonda and Robert Redford Golden Lions in Venice Archived January 15, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. labiennale.org

^ "Work Out with Jane Fonda, No VHS Required". Shape Magazine. December 29, 2014. Archived from the original on November 25, 2018. Retrieved January 5, 2019.

^ "Interview". WNYC Radio FM. NPR. November 1, 2019.

^ Fonda, Henry (1981). My Life. New York: Dutton. page=???

^ The Fonda immigrant ancestor came from Eagum (also spelled Augum or Agum), a village in Friesland, a northern province of the Netherlands. Jellis Douwe Fonda (1614–1659), a Dutch emigrant from Friesland, immigrated and first went to Beverwyck (now Albany) in 1650; he founded of the City of Fonda, New York (see "Descendants of Jellis Douw Fonda (1614–1659)". fonda.org. and "Ancestry of Peter Fonda". genealogy.com. Archived from the original on March 15, 2012.

^ Kiernan, Thomas (1973). 'Jane: An Intimate Biography of Jane Fonda. Putnam. p. 12.

^ Andersen, Christopher P. (1991). Citizen Jane: The Turbulent Life of Jane Fonda. Dell. p. 14.

^ Fonda (2005), p. 41.

^ Craven, Jo (October 12, 2008). "Pilar Corrias: a new gallery for a new era". The Daily Telegraph. London.

^ "The Craig House Institute / Tioranda, Beacon". Roadtrippers. Retrieved July 22, 2016.

^ Fonda (2005), pp. 16–17.

^ "SAGE Nets $35K at Annual Pines Fête". Fire Island News. June 25, 2008. Archived from the original on December 5, 2008.

^ Sonneborn, Liz (2002). A to Z of American women in the performing arts. New York: Facts on File. p. 71. ISBN 0-8160-4398-1.

^ a b Browne, Pat; Browne, Ray Broadus (2001). The Guide to United States Popular Culture. Bowling Green, OH: Bowling Green State University Popular Press. p. 288. ISBN 0-87972-821-3.

^ a b Bosworth, Patricia (2011). Jane Fonda: The Private Life of a Public Woman. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. pp. 98, 315. ISBN 978-0-547-50447-6.

^ Foster, Arnold W., and Blau, Judith R. Art and Society: Readings in the Sociology of the Arts, SUNY Press (1989) pp. 118–119. ISBN 978-0-7914-0116-3.

^ 

^ "Harvard Lampoon Lampoons Films". Sarasota Herald-Tribune. April 6, 1963. Retrieved February 24, 2014.

^ "Film Review: The Chase". January 1, 1966. Retrieved January 5, 2019.

^ "They Shoot Horses, Don't They?". January 1, 1969. Retrieved January 5, 2019.

^ a b Als, Hilton (May 2, 2011). "Queen Jane, Approximately". ISSN 0028-792X. Retrieved July 16, 2019.

^ "Jane Fonda". The Guardian. June 3, 2005. Retrieved January 5, 2019 – via www.theguardian.com.

^ Kael, Pauline (February 3, 1974). "A restless yawing between extremes". The New York Times.

^ Ebert, Roger. "Klute Movie Review & Film Summary (1971) – Roger Ebert". www.rogerebert.com. Retrieved January 5, 2019.

^ "Film: 'A Doll's House,' '73Vintage Jane Fonda". The New York Times. March 8, 1978. Retrieved January 5, 2019.

^ Jane Fonda profile Archived August 2, 2008, at the Wayback Machine. Hello! Magazine; retrieved April 2, 2006.

^ Fonda, 2005, p. 378

^ Zinnemann, Fred. A Life in the Movies. An Autobiography, Macmillan Books, (1992) p. 226

^ Canby, Vincent (February 10, 1977). "'Dick and Jane' in Screen Romp". The New York Times. Retrieved January 5, 2019.

^ Arnold, Gary (October 12, 1977). "A Graceful, Faithful, Ephemeral 'Julia'". The Washington Post.

^ a b c d e f g h Stated in interview on Inside the Actors Studio

^ Rosenbaum, Jonathan (June 15, 1978). "War Bonds on Coming Home, 1978 Review". San Diego Reader.

^ "Variety review". Archived from the original on February 5, 2013. Retrieved January 5, 2019.

^ "California Suite | review, synopsis, book tickets, showtimes, movie r…". archive.fo. February 4, 2013. Archived from the original on February 4, 2013. Retrieved July 16, 2019.

^ Canby, Vincent (March 16, 1979). "Nuclear Plant Is Villain in 'China Syndrome': A Question of Ethics". The New York Times.

^ Top Grossing Films of 1979. Archived June 12, 2018, at the Wayback Machine Listal. Retrieved August 14, 2017.

^ "The Electric Horseman (1979)". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved January 28, 2012.

^ 1980 Yearly Box Office Results. boxofficemojo.com

^ "Barbarella comes of age", The Age, May 14, 2005; retrieved May 5, 2008. "If Barbarella was an act of rebellion, On Golden Pond (1981) was a more mature rapprochement: Fonda bought the rights to Ernest Thompson's play to offer the role to her father."

^ "Pauline Kael". www.geocities.ws. Archived from the original on January 14, 2019. Retrieved January 5, 2019.

^ Canby, Vincent (February 9, 1990). "Review/Film; Middle-Aged and Not Quite Middle Class". The New York Times. Retrieved January 5, 2019.

^ Goldwert, Lindsay (September 14, 2010). "Jane Fonda is back in her leotard, at 72; iconic actress and fitness guru to debut new fitness DVDs". New York Daily News. Retrieved July 23, 2013.

^ Solomon, Deborah. "Jane Fonda profile". The New York Times. Retrieved July 19, 2011.

^ Scott, A. O. (May 11, 2007). Hey, California Girl, Don't Mess With Grandma. Georgia Rule Review. NYTimes. Retrieved May 11, 2007.

^ "Jane Fonda returns to Broadway in '33 Variations'". USA Today. Associated Press. November 3, 2008; retrieved July 19, 2011.

^ Frey, Hillary (March 3, 2009). "Broadway Bows Down to Power Dames Fonda, Sarandon, Lansbury". The New York Observer. Archived from the original on March 10, 2009. Retrieved March 6, 2009.

^ Brantley, Ben (March 9, 2009). Beethoven and Fonda: Broadway Soulmates. NYTimes. Retrieved March 9, 2009.

^ "Search Past Winners" Archived August 18, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. Tony Awards. Retrieved July 19, 2011.

^ "Jane Fonda in a French Twist". Daily Express (London). May 24, 2010.

^ "Et si on vivait tous ensemble". The New York Times. Retrieved February 18, 2011.

^ Young, Neil (August 3, 2011). "And If We All Lived Together?' ('Et si on vivait tous ensemble?')". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved April 3, 2012.

^ Kit, Borys (May 4, 2010), "Fonda, Keener in 'Peace' accord". Reuters. Retrieved July 19, 2011.

^ Snierson, Dan (October 31, 2014). "Jane Fonda plays Mr. Burns' secret lover on 'The Simpsons'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 16, 2014. Retrieved December 14, 2014.

^ "Jane Fonda and Lily Tomlin Back Together Again in "Grace and Frankie", A New Original Comedy Series on Netflix". The Futon Critic. March 19, 2014. Retrieved August 30, 2014.

^ "49 Celebrities Honor 49 Victims of Orlando Tragedy | Human Rights Campaign". Hrc.org. Retrieved June 30, 2016.

^ Rothaus, Steve (June 12, 2016). "Pulse Orlando shooting scene a popular LGBT club where employees, patrons 'like family'". The Miami Herald. Retrieved June 15, 2016.

^ Sheri Linden (January 20, 2018). "'Jane Fonda in Five Acts': Film Review | Sundance 2018". Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved September 21, 2018.

^ "About Jane Fonda In Five Acts". www.hbo.com. Retrieved September 20, 2018.

^ Fonda, 2005, p. 139

^ "Alcatraz is Not an Island". PBS. 2002.

^ "The Black Panthers". Socialist Worker. London, UK. January 6, 2007. Archived from the original on August 7, 2013.

^ Rotten Tomatoes profile of F.T.A. Archived December 6, 2008, at the Wayback Machine; retrieved April 2, 2006.

^ Nicosia, Gerald (2004). Home to war: a history of the Vietnam veterans' movement. Carroll & Graf. p. 73. ISBN 978-0-7867-1403-2.

^ The 2004 Campaign: The Massachusetts Senator; In '71 Antiwar Words, a Complex View of Kerry; The New York Times; Todd S. Purdum; February 28, 2004

^ a b Jane Fonda's War: A Political Biography of an Antiwar Icon; Mary Hershberger; The New Press; pp. 75–81

^ "The Battle of the Dikes". Time. August 7, 1972. Retrieved April 1, 2008.

^ Roberts, Laura (July 26, 2010). "Jane Fonda relives her protest days on the set of her new film". The Daily Telegraph. London. Retrieved July 19, 2011.

^ "Jane Fonda mistakes". Washington Times. December 23, 2012. Archived from the original on October 12, 2014. Retrieved November 7, 2014.

^ a b "The Truth About My Trip To Hanoi". July 22, 2011; accessed January 27, 2014 at the Jane Fonda official website.

^ Fonda, Jane (2005). My Life So Far. Random House. p. 324. ISBN 978-1-588-36478-4.

^ a b "Hanoi'd with Jane". Snopes.com. May 25, 2005. Retrieved August 25, 2008.

^ Andersen, p. 266.

^ "Jane Fonda Grants Some P.O.W. Torture". The New York Times. April 7, 1973.

^ "Indochina Peace Campaign". Womankind. The Chicago Women's Liberation Union Herstory Project. November 1972. Archived from the original on July 8, 2011. Retrieved February 3, 2011.

^ "Indochina Peace Campaign, Boston Office: Records, 1972–1975". University of Massachusetts. Archived from the original on June 10, 2010. Retrieved September 8, 2009.

^ Brush, Peter (2004). "Hating Jane: The American Military and Jane Fonda". Vanderbilt University. Archived from the original on April 4, 2010.

^ Ross, Steven J. (2011). "Movement Leader, Grassroots Builder: Jane Fonda". Hollywood Left and Right: How Movie Stars Shaped American Politics. New York: Oxford University Press. p. 229. ISBN 978-0-19-518172-2. Retrieved November 7, 2014.

^ "Plebe Summer Standard Operating Procedures" (PDF). United States Naval Academy. March 13, 2013. pp. 5–4. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 19, 2013. Retrieved April 14, 2013.

^ Fowler, Brandi (July 18, 2011). "Jane Fonda rips QVC after appearance scuttled". msnbc.com. Retrieved July 19, 2011.

^ Keller, Julie (April 20, 2005). "Veteran Not Fonda Jane". E! Online. Retrieved July 19, 2011.

^ "Interview with Barbara Walters". UC Berkeley Library Sound Recording Project. 1988. Retrieved February 16, 2008.

^ "Jane Fonda: Wish I Hadn't". 60 minutes. CBS. March 31, 2005. Retrieved February 16, 2008.

^ Burr, William; Aid, Matthew M., eds. (September 25, 2013). "Disreputable if Not Outright Illegal': The National Security Agency versus Martin Luther King, Muhammad Ali, Art Buchwald, Frank Church, et al". National Security Archive. George Washington University. Archived from the original on September 26, 2013.

^ Pilkington, Ed (September 26, 2013). "Declassified NSA files show agency spied on Muhammad Ali and MLK". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on September 26, 2013. Retrieved September 26, 2013.

^ Christopher Hanson (August 13, 1982). "British 'helped U.S. in spying on activists'". The Vancouver Sun. Retrieved November 30, 2013.

^ "'UK aided spy check'". Evening Times. Glasgow, Scotland. August 13, 1982. Retrieved November 30, 2013.

^ a b Jane Fonda (May 26, 2009). "Mug Shot". www.janefonda.com. Retrieved September 20, 2018.

^ a b c d Alanna Vagianos (March 17, 2017). "Jane Fonda is Selling Merchandise With Her 1970 Mugshot On It". Huffington Post. Retrieved September 20, 2018.

^ a b Late Show with Stephen Colbert (September 20, 2018). Jane Fonda's Activism Drew the Ire of Nixon. YouTube.com. Retrieved September 20, 2018.

^ E News. Jane Fonda Never Expected To See Her Mugshot on Billboards. www.eonline.com. Retrieved September 20, 2018.

^ "Jane Fonda Reveals She Was Raped – and Sexually Abused as a Child: 'I Always Thought It Was My Fault'". March 2, 2017.

^ "Jane Fonda reveals rape and child abuse". BBC News. March 3, 2017. Retrieved January 5, 2019 – via www.bbc.com.

^ "V-Day's 2007 Press Kit" (PDF). V-Day. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 27, 2008. Retrieved February 15, 2008.

^ "Jane Fonda Center for Adolescent Reproductive Health". Emory University, Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics. Archived from the original on November 11, 2005. Retrieved February 3, 2011.

^ "Actresses Speak Out in Mexico City". CBS News. May 10, 2006. Retrieved February 15, 2008.

^ Josh Aronson and Ariel Orr Jordan. "Beautiful Daughters".

^ "Jane Fonda FI:s galjonsfigur för en dag" (in Swedish). Metro International. September 9, 2006. Archived from the original on February 28, 2008. Retrieved February 15, 2008.

^ Fonda, My Life So Far.

^ Smith, Nigel M. (April 15, 2016). "Jane Fonda at Tribeca: 'Hillary Clinton will be president'". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved May 8, 2017.

^ Tizon, Alex (December 2, 1997). "Facing The End, Activist Reflects On Life's Victories". The Seattle Times. Retrieved March 5, 2010.

^ Whitebear, Bernie. "Self-Determination: Taking Back Fort Lawton. Meeting the Needs of Seattle's Native American Community Through Conversion", Race, Poverty & the Environment, Volume IV, Number 4/Volume V, Number 1 (Spring – Summer 1994) Archived January 9, 2009, at the Wayback Machine, p. 5.

^ "Jane Fonda rails against President Trump's pipeline orders at Manhattan protest". New York Daily News. January 24, 2017. Retrieved January 25, 2017.

^ "Fonda joins Jerusalem demo". BBC News Online. December 2, 2002; accessed February 8, 2014.

^ "Jane in Jerusalem". Jewish World Review. December 23, 2002; retrieved April 2, 2006.

^ "No Celebration of Occupation: 1,500 Artists and Writers Sign Letter Protesting Toronto Film Festival Decision to Spotlight Tel Aviv". Democracy Now!. September 14, 2009. Retrieved December 28, 2012.

^ "Brand Israel set to launch in GTA". Archived from the original on September 12, 2009. Retrieved September 14, 2009.CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link) Canadian Jewish News. August 21, 2009; accessed February 8, 2014.

^ "Canadian director protests TIFF Tel Aviv spotlight". CBC News. August 29, 2009.

^ French, Cameron (September 4, 2009). "Artists protest Tel Aviv focus at Toronto film fest". Reuters.

^ Knegt, Peter (September 3, 2009). "Fonda, Loach and Klein Among Those Joining Protest Against TIFF". IndieWire.com.

^ "An Open Letter to the Toronto International Film Festival". Archived from the original on September 6, 2009. Retrieved September 5, 2009.CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link). September 2, 2009; accessed February 8, 2014.

^ US actor Jane Fonda backs away from Israel row at Toronto film festival; The Guardian; September 16, 2009

^ "To criticize Israel is a dangerous thing in today's Canada". Toronto Star. September 11, 2009; accessed February 8, 2014.

^ a b Fonda, Jane (September 15, 2009). "Expanding the Narrative". The Huffington Post.

^ Minkin, David (September 14, 2009). "Atlanta Jews Reject Vilification and Stand Up for Jane Fonda". The Huffington Post; accessed February 8, 2014.

^ "Jane Fonda to oppose Iraq war on bus tour". USA Today. Associated Press. July 25, 2005. Archived from the original on February 10, 2006. Retrieved January 22, 2011.

^ Friedman, Roger (September 7, 2005), "Fonda Puts Brakes on Bus Tour" Archived November 6, 2018, at the Wayback Machine, FOX News; retrieved April 2, 2006.

^ Baxter, Sarah (September 25, 2005). "Jane stands up Gorgeous George". The Sunday Times. London. Retrieved January 22, 2011.

^ "War protesters demand U.S. troop withdrawal". NBC News. Associated Press. January 27, 2007. Retrieved January 22, 2011.

^ Ruane, Michael & Kunkle, Fredrick (January 28, 2007). "Thousands Protest Bush Policy". The Washington Post. p. 2. Retrieved January 22, 2011.

^ " Does a photograph show Senator John Kerry at a 1970 anti-war rally?" Snopes; retrieved April 2, 2006.

^ "Does a photograph show Senator John Kerry and Jane Fonda sharing a speaker's platform at an anti-war rally?" Snopes.com; retrieved April 2, 2006.

^ Swann, Jennifer (July 5, 2015). "Marching for Action on Climate Change, Jane Fonda Warns Against Arctic Oil Drilling". take part. Archived from the original on July 6, 2015. Retrieved July 6, 2015.

^ "Jane Fonda slams Justin Trudeau: 'Don't be fooled by good-looking liberals'". The Telegraph. January 12, 2017.

^ "US actress Jane Fonda arrested at climate protest". BBC News. October 11, 2019. Retrieved October 11, 2019.

^ Parker, Ryan (October 11, 2019). "Jane Fonda Arrested While Protesting in D.C." The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 11, 2019.

^ Parker, Ryan (October 18, 2019). "Jane Fonda and Sam Waterston Arrested While Protesting in D.C." The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 27, 2019.

^ Kreps, Daniel (October 25, 2019). "Ted Danson Arrested Alongside Jane Fonda at D.C. Climate Change Protest". Rolling Stone. Retrieved October 27, 2019.

^ Kendall Trammell. "Jane Fonda got arrested AGAIN. Make that the 4th Friday in a row". CNN. Retrieved November 2, 2019.

^ "If it's Friday, it means Jane Fonda and her red coat got arrested again". Los Angeles Times. November 1, 2019. Retrieved November 2, 2019.

^ Fonda, Jane (December 5, 2019). "Opinion | Jane Fonda: We Have to Live Like We're in a Climate Emergency. Because We Are". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 8, 2019.

^ My life so far. Random House. 2005. ISBN 978-1-588-36478-4.

^ Yardley, Jonathan (April 5, 2005). "First Person, Singular". The Washington Post.

^ Dowd, Maureen (April 24, 2005). "'My Life So Far': The Roles of a Lifetime". The New York Times. Retrieved December 25, 2010.

^ Marianne Schnall (March 27, 2009). "Jane Fonda on Joining the Blogosphere". Huffington Post. Retrieved April 16, 2009.

^ Amazon.com. Prime Time. August 2011. Random House; ISBN 1-4000-6697-2.

^ Jane Fonda Foundation Targeted by The Smoking Gun; NPQ; December 16, 2013; accessed February 8, 2014.

^ Answering Attacks on my Credibility as a Philanthropist; JaneFonda.com; December 2013.

^ Jane Fonda's Philanthropy: A Hollywood Legend Keys in on Reproductive Health Archived October 22, 2016, at the Wayback Machine; Inside Philanthropy; Ade Adeniji; October 2016.

^ Guide to Top Funders Archived October 25, 2016, at the Wayback Machine; Inside Philanthropy; 2016.

^ "Jane Fonda Marries Frenchman". The Miami News. August 14, 1965.

^ Fonda, (2005), p. 203.

^ "Fonda Gets Divorce". The Palm Beach Post. January 18, 1973.

^ "Jane Fonda Weds Chicago 7 Member". Gadsden Times. January 22, 1973.

^ Ross, Steven J. (2011). Hollywood Left and Right: How Movie Stars Shaped American Politics. Oxford University Press. p. 255. ISBN 978-0199911431.

^ Fonda (2005), p. 342.

^ Tyrangiel, Josh (April 2, 2005). "Being Jane". TIME. Retrieved December 24, 2010.

^ Fonda (2005), pp. 382–84.

^ "Star Tracks". People. July 2, 1990. Archived from the original on October 13, 2014.

^ "Ted Turner, Jane Fonda Tie Knot". Observer-Reporter. December 22, 1991.

^ "Judge Approves Fonda Divorce". ABC News. May 22, 2001. Archived from the original on May 25, 2018. Retrieved May 25, 2018.

^ "'Busy' Jane Fonda Puts Wedding On Hold". Daily Express. London. October 14, 2010.

^ "Prime Time & Oscars". JaneFonda.com. February 29, 2012.

^ "Jane Fonda and Richard Perry Split After 8 Years". People Magazine. January 24, 2017.

^ Enright, Michael (December 30, 2018) . The Sunday Edition – December 30, 2018 (Radio interview). CBC. Event occurs at 17:30. It was men I wanted to please, it was men that I felt validated by; if I wasn't with an alpha male, I wouldn't exist. My friends are mostly women now, that are influencing, changing my life now, but up until (I was) 62, it was men that I was concerned about. ... Some men have a hard time realizing that the woman they're married to is strong and smart and they have to diminish that, because it makes them feel diminished. Too bad we have defined masculinity in such a way that it's so easily shamed.

^ "About My Faith". JaneFonda.com. Retrieved March 5, 2010.

^ "Upaya Zen Center Retreat". JaneFonda.com. Retrieved February 14, 2015.

^ "New Year's Resolution". JaneFonda.com. Retrieved March 5, 2010.

^ "Jane Fonda Opens Up About Her Decades-Long Battle with Bulimia". Every Day Health. October 9, 2011. Archived from the original on February 5, 2017. Retrieved January 25, 2017.

^ "My Convoluted Journey to Feminism". Lenny Letter. March 23, 2016. Archived from the original on April 6, 2017. Retrieved May 18, 2017.

^ a b "Jane Fonda Opens Up About 'Ongoing Battle' With Cancer". Fox News. April 4, 2019.

^ "Jane Fonda suffers  breast cancer". The Daily Telegraph. November 13, 2010.

^ Jane Fonda: The Private Life of a Public Woman; Patricia Bosworth; Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2011; p. 177.

^ "Past Recipients: Crystal Award". Women In Film. Archived from the original on June 30, 2011. Retrieved May 10, 2011.

^ a b "California Hall of Fame biography of Jane Fonda". Archived from the original on February 4, 2014. Retrieved July 23, 2013.

^ "21 Leaders for the 21st Century – Seven Who Change Their Worlds" Archived December 4, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. Women's eNews. December 23, 2003.

^ "An Exceptional Palme d'Or to Jane Fonda". festival-cannes.fr. May 26, 2007. Archived from the original on January 18, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2010.

^ "Ehrenpreisträger | Deutscher Nachhaltigkeitspreis". April 6, 2014. Archived from the original on April 6, 2014. Retrieved July 16, 2019.

^ AFI Life Achievement Awards; American Film Institute; December 26, 2013; accessed January 27, 2014.

^ "'Lebenswerk International': Jane Fonda". Goldene Kamera (in German). Archived from the original on March 24, 2017. Retrieved March 4, 2017.

^ "Meghan Markle puts Sinéad Burke on the cover of Vogue's September issue". The Irish Times. Retrieved July 31, 2019.

^ National Women's Hall of Fame, Jane Fonda

Bibliography 

Andersen, Christopher. Citizen Jane. 1990: Henry Holt and Company; ISBN 0-8050-0959-0.

Collier, Peter (1991). The Fondas: A Hollywood Dynasty. Putnam. ISBN 0-399-13592-8.

Davidson, Bill. Jane Fonda: An Intimate Biography. 1991: New American Library. ISBN 0-451-17028-8.

Fine, Carla and Jane Fonda. Strong, Smart, and Bold: Empowering Girls for Life. 2001: Collins; ISBN 0-06-019771-4.

Fonda, Jane. My Life So Far (2005): Random House. ISBN 978-1-588-36478-4.

Fonda, Jane. Jane Fonda's Workout Book. 1986: Random House Value Publishing; ISBN 0-517-40908-9.

Fonda, Jane, with Mignon McCarthy. Women Coming of Age. 1987: Random House Value Publishing; ISBN 5-550-36643-6.

Fox, Mary Virginia and Mary Molina. Jane Fonda: Something to Fight for. 1980: Dillon Press; ISBN 0-87518-189-9.

Freedland, Michael. Jane Fonda: The Many Lives of One of Hollywood's Greatest Stars. 1989: HarperCollins Publishers; ISBN 0-00-637390-9.

French, Sean. Jane Fonda: A Biography. 1998: Trafalgar Square Publishing; ISBN 1-85793-658-2.

Gilmore, John. Laid Bare: A Memoir of Wrecked Lives and the Hollywood Death Trip. Amok Books, 1997; ISBN 1-878923-08-0.

Hershberger, Mary. Peace work, war myths: Jane Fonda and the antiwar movement. Peace & Change, Vol. 29, No. 3&4, July 2004.

Hershberger, Mary. Jane Fonda's War: A Political Biography of an Antiwar Icon. 2005: New Press; ISBN 1-56584-988-4.

Kiernan, Thomas. Jane: an intimate biography of Jane Fonda. 1973: Putnam; ISBN 0-399-11207-3.

Lembcke, Jerry (2010). Hanoi Jane: War, Sex, and Fantasies of Betrayal. Culture, Politics, and the Cold War. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. ISBN 978-1-55849-815-0.

External links

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Jane Fonda.

 Wikiquote has quotations related to: Jane Fonda

Official website

Jane Fonda on IMDb

Jane Fonda at the Internet Broadway Database

Jane Fonda at the University of Wisconsin's Actors Studio audio collection

Appearances on C-SPAN

Jane Fonda on Charlie Rose

"Jane Fonda collected news and commentary". The New York Times.

Jane Fonda Profile at Turner Classic Movies

About.com article about Fonda's Vietnam era activities

Jane Fonda and Gloria Steinem discuss The Women's Media Center, their non-profit media organization. (video)

Fonda Family Genealogy

Photo gallery at CBS News

Jane Fonda Video produced by Makers: Women Who Make America

An Interview with Jane Fonda on Gender

Awards for Jane Fonda

v

t

e

Academy Award for Best Actress

1928–1950 
Janet Gaynor (1928)

Mary Pickford (1929)

Norma Shearer (1930)

Marie Dressler (1931)

Helen Hayes (1932)

Katharine Hepburn (1933)

Claudette Colbert (1934)

Bette Davis (1935)

Luise Rainer (1936)

Luise Rainer (1937)

Bette Davis (1938)

Vivien Leigh (1939)

Ginger Rogers (1940)

Joan Fontaine (1941)

Greer Garson (1942)

Jennifer Jones (1943)

Ingrid Bergman (1944)

Joan Crawford (1945)

Olivia de Havilland (1946)

Loretta Young (1947)

Jane Wyman (1948)

Olivia de Havilland (1949)

Judy Holliday (1950)

1951–1975 
Vivien Leigh (1951)

Shirley Booth (1952)

Audrey Hepburn (1953)

Grace Kelly (1954)

Anna Magnani (1955)

Ingrid Bergman (1956)

Joanne Woodward (1957)

Susan Hayward (1958)

Simone Signoret (1959)

Elizabeth Taylor (1960)

Sophia Loren (1961)

Anne Bancroft (1962)

Patricia Neal (1963)

Julie Andrews (1964)

Julie Christie (1965)

Elizabeth Taylor (1966)

Katharine Hepburn (1967)

Katharine Hepburn / Barbra Streisand (1968)

Maggie Smith (1969)

Glenda Jackson (1970)

Jane Fonda (1971)

Liza Minnelli (1972)

Glenda Jackson (1973)

Ellen Burstyn (1974)

Louise Fletcher (1975)

1976–2000 
Faye Dunaway (1976)

Diane Keaton (1977)

Jane Fonda (1978)

Sally Field (1979)

Sissy Spacek (1980)

Katharine Hepburn (1981)

Meryl Streep (1982)

Shirley MacLaine (1983)

Sally Field (1984)

Geraldine Page (1985)

Marlee Matlin (1986)

Cher (1987)

Jodie Foster (1988)

Jessica Tandy (1989)

Kathy Bates (1990)

Jodie Foster (1991)

Emma Thompson (1992)

Holly Hunter (1993)

Jessica Lange (1994)

Susan Sarandon (1995)

Frances McDormand (1996)

Helen Hunt (1997)

Gwyneth Paltrow (1998)

Hilary Swank (1999)

Julia Roberts (2000)

2001–present 
Halle Berry (2001)

Nicole Kidman (2002)

Charlize Theron (2003)

Hilary Swank (2004)

Reese Witherspoon (2005)

Helen Mirren (2006)

Marion Cotillard (2007)

Kate Winslet (2008)

Sandra Bullock (2009)

Natalie Portman (2010)

Meryl Streep (2011)

Jennifer Lawrence (2012)

Cate Blanchett (2013)

Julianne Moore (2014)

Brie Larson (2015)

Emma Stone (2016)

Frances McDormand (2017)

Olivia Colman (2018)

Renée Zellweger (2019)

v

t

e

AFI Life Achievement Award

John Ford (1973)

James Cagney (1974)

Orson Welles (1975)

William Wyler (1976)

Bette Davis (1977)

Henry Fonda (1978)

Alfred Hitchcock (1979)

James Stewart (1980)

Fred Astaire (1981)

Frank Capra (1982)

John Huston (1983)

Lillian Gish (1984)

Gene Kelly (1985)

Billy Wilder (1986)

Barbara Stanwyck (1987)

Jack Lemmon (1988)

Gregory Peck (1989)

David Lean (1990)

Kirk Douglas (1991)

Sidney Poitier (1992)

Elizabeth Taylor (1993)

Jack Nicholson (1994)

Steven Spielberg (1995)

Clint Eastwood (1996)

Martin Scorsese (1997)

Robert Wise (1998)

Dustin Hoffman (1999)

Harrison Ford (2000)

Barbra Streisand (2001)

Tom Hanks (2002)

Robert De Niro (2003)

Meryl Streep (2004)

George Lucas (2005)

Sean Connery (2006)

Al Pacino (2007)

Warren Beatty (2008)

Michael Douglas (2009)

Mike Nichols (2010)

Morgan Freeman (2011)

Shirley MacLaine (2012)

Mel Brooks (2013)

Jane Fonda (2014)

Steve Martin (2015)

John Williams (2016)

Diane Keaton (2017)

George Clooney (2018)

Denzel Washington (2019)

Julie Andrews (2020)

v

t

e

BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role

1952–1967

British 
Vivien Leigh (1952)

Audrey Hepburn (1953)

Yvonne Mitchell (1954)

Katie Johnson (1955)

Virginia McKenna (1956)

Heather Sears (1957)

Irene Worth (1958)

Audrey Hepburn (1959)

Rachel Roberts (1960)

Dora Bryan (1961)

Leslie Caron (1962)

Rachel Roberts (1963)

Audrey Hepburn (1964)

Julie Christie (1965)

Elizabeth Taylor (1966)

Edith Evans (1967)

Foreign 
Simone Signoret (1952)

Leslie Caron (1953)

Cornell Borchers (1954)

Betsy Blair (1955)

Anna Magnani (1956)

Simone Signoret (1957)

Simone Signoret (1958)

Shirley MacLaine (1959)

Shirley MacLaine (1960)

Sophia Loren (1961)

Anne Bancroft (1962)

Patricia Neal (1963)

Anne Bancroft (1964)

Patricia Neal (1965)

Jeanne Moreau (1966)

Anouk Aimée (1967)

1968–present 
Katharine Hepburn (1968)

Maggie Smith (1969)

Katharine Ross (1970)

Glenda Jackson (1971)

Liza Minnelli (1972)

Stéphane Audran (1973)

Joanne Woodward (1974)

Ellen Burstyn (1975)

Louise Fletcher (1976)

Diane Keaton (1977)

Jane Fonda (1978)

Jane Fonda (1979)

Judy Davis (1980)

Meryl Streep (1981)

Katharine Hepburn (1982)

Julie Walters (1983)

Maggie Smith (1984)

Peggy Ashcroft (1985)

Maggie Smith (1986)

Anne Bancroft (1987)

Maggie Smith (1988)

Pauline Collins (1989)

Jessica Tandy (1990)

Jodie Foster (1991)

Emma Thompson (1992)

Holly Hunter (1993)

Susan Sarandon (1994)

Emma Thompson (1995)

Brenda Blethyn (1996)

Judi Dench (1997)

Cate Blanchett (1998)

Annette Bening (1999)

Julia Roberts (2000)

Judi Dench (2001)

Nicole Kidman (2002)

Scarlett Johansson (2003)

Imelda Staunton (2004)

Reese Witherspoon (2005)

Helen Mirren (2006)

Marion Cotillard (2007)

Kate Winslet (2008)

Carey Mulligan (2009)

Natalie Portman (2010)

Meryl Streep (2011)

Emmanuelle Riva (2012)

Cate Blanchett (2013)

Julianne Moore (2014)

Brie Larson (2015)

Emma Stone (2016)

Frances McDormand (2017)

Olivia Colman (2018)

Renée Zellweger (2019)

v

t

e

Britannia Awards

Excellence in Film 
Albert R. Broccoli (1989)

Michael Caine (1990)

Peter Ustinov (1992)

Martin Scorsese (1993)

Anthony Hopkins (1995)

Bob Weinstein and Harvey Weinstein (1996)

Dustin Hoffman (1997)

John Travolta (1998)

Stanley Kubrick (1999)

Steven Spielberg (2000)

George Lucas (2002)

Hugh Grant (2003)

Tom Hanks (2004)

Tom Cruise (2005)

Clint Eastwood (2006)

Denzel Washington (2007)

Sean Penn (2008)

Robert De Niro (2009)

Jeff Bridges (2010)

Warren Beatty (2011)

Daniel Day-Lewis (2012)

George Clooney (2013)

Robert Downey Jr. (2014)

Meryl Streep (2015)

Jodie Foster (2016)

Matt Damon (2017)

Cate Blanchett (2018)

Jane Fonda (2019)

Excellence in Directing 
Peter Weir (2003)

Jim Sheridan (2004)

Mike Newell (2005)

Anthony Minghella (2006)

Martin Campbell (2007)

Stephen Frears (2008)

Danny Boyle (2009)

Christopher Nolan (2010)

David Yates (2011)

Quentin Tarantino (2012)

Kathryn Bigelow (2013)

Mike Leigh (2014)

Sam Mendes (2015)

Ang Lee (2016)

Ava DuVernay (2017)

Steve McQueen (2018)

Jordan Peele (2019)

Worldwide Contribution to

Entertainment 
Howard Stringer (2003)

Kirk Douglas (2009)

Ridley Scott & Tony Scott (2010)

John Lasseter (2011)

Will Wright (2012)

Ben Kingsley (2013)

Judi Dench (2014)

Harrison Ford (2015)

Samuel L. Jackson (2016)

Kenneth Branagh (2017)

Kevin Feige (2018)

Jackie Chan (2019)

British Artist of the Year 
Rachel Weisz (2006)

Kate Winslet (2007)

Tilda Swinton (2008)

Emily Blunt (2009)

Michael Sheen (2010)

Helena Bonham Carter (2011)

Daniel Craig (2012)

Benedict Cumberbatch (2013)

Emma Watson (2014)

James Corden (2015)

Felicity Jones (2016)

Claire Foy (2017)

Emilia Clarke (2018)

Phoebe Waller-Bridge (2019)

Excellence in Comedy 
Betty White (2010)

Ben Stiller (2011)

Trey Parker and Matt Stone (2012)

Sacha Baron Cohen (2013)

Julia Louis-Dreyfus (2014)

Amy Schumer (2015)

Ricky Gervais (2016)

Aziz Ansari (2017)

Jim Carrey (2018)

Steve Coogan (2019)

Excellence in Television 
Aaron Spelling (1999)

 HBO Original Programming (2002)

Dick Van Dyke (2017)

Damian Lewis (2018)

Norman Lear (2019)

Humanitarian Award 
Richard Curtis (2007)

Don Cheadle (2008)

Colin Firth (2009)

Idris Elba (2013)

Mark Ruffalo (2014)

Orlando Bloom (2015)

Ewan McGregor (2016)

Retired Awards 
BBC (1999)

Tarsem Singh (1999)

Angela Lansbury (2003)

Helen Mirren (2004)

Elizabeth Taylor (2005)

Ronald Neame (2005)

Sidney Poitier (2006)

Bob Shaye and Michael Lynne (2007)

v

t

e

Critics' Choice Television Award for Best Guest Performer in a Drama Series

Lucy Liu (2012)

Jane Fonda (2013)

Allison Janney (2014)

Sam Elliott (2015)

Margo Martindale (2016)

Jeffrey Dean Morgan (2016)

v

t

e

David di Donatello Award for Best Foreign Actress

Ingrid Bergman (1957)

Deborah Kerr (1959)

Audrey Hepburn (1960)

Brigitte Bardot (1961)

Audrey Hepburn (1962)

Geraldine Page (1963)

Shirley MacLaine (1964)

Audrey Hepburn (1965)

Julie Andrews (1966)

Julie Christie / Elizabeth Taylor (1967)

Faye Dunaway / Katharine Hepburn (1968)

Mia Farrow / Barbra Streisand (1969)

Liza Minnelli (1970)

Ali MacGraw (1971)

Elizabeth Taylor (1972)

Liza Minnelli (1973)

Barbra Streisand / Tatum O'Neal (1974)

Liv Ullmann (1975)

Isabelle Adjani / Glenda Jackson (1976)

Faye Dunaway / Annie Girardot (1977)

Jane Fonda / Simone Signoret (1978)

Ingrid Bergman / Liv Ullmann (1979)

Isabelle Huppert (1980)

Catherine Deneuve (1981)

Diane Keaton (1982)

Julie Andrews (1983)

Shirley MacLaine (1984)

Meryl Streep (1985)

Meryl Streep (1986)

Norma Aleandro (1987)

Cher (1988)

Jodie Foster (1989)

Jessica Tandy (1990)

Anne Parillaud (1991)

Geena Davis / Susan Sarandon (1992)

Emmanuelle Béart / Tilda Swinton / Emma Thompson (1993)

Emma Thompson (1994)

Jodie Foster (1995)

Susan Sarandon (1996)

v

t

e

Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Limited Series or Movie

Judith Anderson (1954)

Mary Martin (1955)

Claire Trevor (1956)

Polly Bergen (1957)

Julie Harris (1959)

Ingrid Bergman (1960)

Judith Anderson (1961)

Julie Harris (1962)

Kim Stanley (1963)

Shelley Winters (1964)

Lynn Fontanne (1965)

Simone Signoret (1966)

Geraldine Page (1967)

Maureen Stapleton (1968)

Geraldine Page (1969)

Patty Duke (1970)

Lee Grant (1971)

Glenda Jackson (1972)

Susan Hampshire / Cloris Leachman (1973)

Mildred Natwick / Cicely Tyson (1974)

Katharine Hepburn / Jessica Walter (1975)

Susan Clark / Rosemary Harris (1976)

Patty Duke / Sally Field (1977)

Meryl Streep / Joanne Woodward (1978)

Bette Davis (1979)

Patty Duke (1980)

Vanessa Redgrave (1981)

Ingrid Bergman (1982)

Barbara Stanwyck (1983)

Jane Fonda (1984)

Joanne Woodward (1985)

Marlo Thomas (1986)

Gena Rowlands (1987)

Jessica Tandy (1988)

Holly Hunter (1989)

Barbara Hershey (1990)

Lynn Whitfield (1991)

Gena Rowlands (1992)

Holly Hunter (1993)

Kirstie Alley (1994)

Glenn Close (1995)

Helen Mirren (1996)

Alfre Woodard (1997)

Ellen Barkin (1998)

Helen Mirren (1999)

Halle Berry (2000)

Judy Davis (2001)

Laura Linney (2002)

Maggie Smith (2003)

Meryl Streep (2004)

S. Epatha Merkerson (2005)

Helen Mirren (2006)

Helen Mirren (2007)

Laura Linney (2008)

Jessica Lange (2009)

Claire Danes (2010)

Kate Winslet (2011)

Julianne Moore (2012)

Laura Linney (2013)

Jessica Lange (2014)

Frances McDormand (2015)

Sarah Paulson (2016)

Nicole Kidman (2017)

Regina King (2018)

Michelle Williams (2019)

v

t

e

Film Society of Lincoln Center Gala Tribute Honorees

Charlie Chaplin (1972)

Fred Astaire (1973)

Alfred Hitchcock (1974)

Joanne Woodward and Paul Newman (1975)

George Cukor (1978)

Bob Hope (1979)

John Huston (1980)

Barbara Stanwyck (1981)

Billy Wilder (1982)

Laurence Olivier (1983)

Claudette Colbert (1984)

Federico Fellini (1985)

Elizabeth Taylor (1986)

Alec Guinness (1987)

Yves Montand (1988)

Bette Davis (1989)

James Stewart (1990)

Audrey Hepburn (1991)

Gregory Peck (1992)

Jack Lemmon (1993)

Robert Altman (1994)

Shirley MacLaine (1995)

Clint Eastwood (1996)

Sean Connery (1997)

Martin Scorsese (1998)

Mike Nichols (1999)

Al Pacino (2000)

Jane Fonda (2001)

Francis Ford Coppola (2002)

Susan Sarandon (2003)

Michael Caine (2004)

Dustin Hoffman (2005)

Jessica Lange (2006)

Diane Keaton (2007)

Meryl Streep (2008)

Tom Hanks (2009)

Michael Douglas (2010)

Sidney Poitier (2011)

Catherine Deneuve (2012)

Barbra Streisand (2013)

Rob Reiner (2014)

Robert Redford (2015)

Morgan Freeman (2016)

Robert De Niro (2017)

Helen Mirren (2018)

No honoree (2019)

Spike Lee (2020)

v

t

e

Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama

Jennifer Jones (1943)

Ingrid Bergman (1944)

Ingrid Bergman (1945)

Rosalind Russell (1946)

Rosalind Russell (1947)

Jane Wyman (1948)

Olivia de Havilland (1949)

Gloria Swanson (1950)

Jane Wyman (1951)

Shirley Booth (1952)

Audrey Hepburn (1953)

Grace Kelly (1954)

Anna Magnani (1955)

Ingrid Bergman (1956)

Joanne Woodward (1957)

Susan Hayward (1958)

Elizabeth Taylor (1959)

Greer Garson (1960)

Geraldine Page (1961)

Geraldine Page (1962)

Leslie Caron (1963)

Anne Bancroft (1964)

Samantha Eggar (1965)

Anouk Aimée (1966)

Edith Evans (1967)

Joanne Woodward (1968)

Geneviève Bujold (1969)

Ali MacGraw (1970)

Jane Fonda (1971)

Liv Ullmann (1972)

Marsha Mason (1973)

Gena Rowlands (1974)

Louise Fletcher (1975)

Faye Dunaway (1976)

Jane Fonda (1977)

Jane Fonda (1978)

Sally Field (1979)

Mary Tyler Moore (1980)

Meryl Streep (1981)

Meryl Streep (1982)

Shirley MacLaine (1983)

Sally Field (1984)

Whoopi Goldberg (1985)

Marlee Matlin (1986)

Sally Kirkland (1987)

Jodie Foster / Shirley MacLaine / Sigourney Weaver (1988)

Michelle Pfeiffer (1989)

Kathy Bates (1990)

Jodie Foster (1991)

Emma Thompson (1992)

Holly Hunter (1993)

Jessica Lange (1994)

Sharon Stone (1995)

Brenda Blethyn (1996)

Judi Dench (1997)

Cate Blanchett (1998)

Hilary Swank (1999)

Julia Roberts (2000)

Sissy Spacek (2001)

Nicole Kidman (2002)

Charlize Theron (2003)

Hilary Swank (2004)

Felicity Huffman (2005)

Helen Mirren (2006)

Julie Christie (2007)

Kate Winslet (2008)

Sandra Bullock (2009)

Natalie Portman (2010)

Meryl Streep (2011)

Jessica Chastain (2012)

Cate Blanchett (2013)

Julianne Moore (2014)

Brie Larson (2015)

Isabelle Huppert (2016)

Frances McDormand (2017)

Glenn Close (2018)

Renée Zellweger (2019)

v

t

e

Golden Globe Award for New Star of the Year – Actress

Lois Maxwell (1948)

Mercedes McCambridge (1950)

Pier Angeli (1952)

Colette Marchand (1953)

Pat Crowley / Bella Darvi / Barbara Rush (1954)

Shirley MacLaine / Kim Novak / Karen Sharpe (1955)

Anita Ekberg / Victoria Shaw / Dana Wynter (1956)

Carroll Baker / Jayne Mansfield / Natalie Wood (1957)

Sandra Dee / Carolyn Jones / Diane Varsi (1958)

Linda Cristal / Susan Kohner / Tina Louise (1959)

Angie Dickinson / Janet Munro / Stella Stevens / Tuesday Weld (1960)

Ina Balin / Nancy Kwan / Hayley Mills (1961)

Ann-Margret / Jane Fonda / Christine Kaufmann (1962)

Patty Duke / Sue Lyon / Rita Tushingham (1963)

Ursula Andress / Tippi Hedren / Elke Sommer (1964)

Mia Farrow / Celia Kaye / Mary Ann Mobley (1965)

Elizabeth Hartman (1966)

Camilla Sparv (1967)

Katharine Ross (1968)

Olivia Hussey (1969)

Ali MacGraw (1970)

Carrie Snodgress (1971)

Twiggy (1972)

Diana Ross (1973)

Tatum O'Neal (1974)

Susan Flannery (1975)

Marilyn Hassett (1976)

Jessica Lange (1977)

Irene Miracle (1979)

Bette Midler (1980)

Nastassja Kinski (1981)

Pia Zadora (1982)

Sandahl Bergman (1983)

v

t

e

Hasty Pudding Woman of the Year

1951–1975 
Gertrude Lawrence (1951)

Barbara Bel Geddes (1952)

Mamie Eisenhower (1953)

Shirley Booth (1954)

Debbie Reynolds (1955)

Peggy Ann Garner (1956)

Carroll Baker (1957)

Katharine Hepburn (1958)

Joanne Woodward (1959)

Carol Lawrence (1960)

Jane Fonda (1961)

Piper Laurie (1962)

Shirley MacLaine (1963)

Rosalind Russell (1964)

Lee Remick (1965)

Ethel Merman (1966)

Lauren Bacall (1967)

Angela Lansbury (1968)

Carol Burnett (1969)

Dionne Warwick (1970)

Carol Channing (1971)

Ruby Keeler (1972)

Liza Minnelli (1973)

Faye Dunaway (1974)

Valerie Harper (1975)

1976–2000 
Bette Midler (1976)

Elizabeth Taylor (1977)

Beverly Sills (1978)

Candice Bergen (1979)

Meryl Streep (1980)

Mary Tyler Moore (1981)

Ella Fitzgerald (1982)

Julie Andrews (1983)

Joan Rivers (1984)

Cher (1985)

Sally Field (1986)

Bernadette Peters (1987)

Lucille Ball (1988)

Kathleen Turner (1989)

Glenn Close (1990)

Diane Keaton (1991)

Jodie Foster (1992)

Whoopi Goldberg (1993)

Meg Ryan (1994)

Michelle Pfeiffer (1995)

Susan Sarandon (1996)

Julia Roberts (1997)

Sigourney Weaver (1998)

Goldie Hawn (1999)

Jamie Lee Curtis (2000)

2001–present 
Drew Barrymore (2001)

Sarah Jessica Parker (2002)

Anjelica Huston (2003)

Sandra Bullock (2004)

Catherine Zeta-Jones (2005)

Halle Berry (2006)

Scarlett Johansson (2007)

Charlize Theron (2008)

Renée Zellweger (2009)

Anne Hathaway (2010)

Julianne Moore (2011)

Claire Danes (2012)

Marion Cotillard (2013)

Helen Mirren (2014)

Amy Poehler (2015)

Kerry Washington (2016)

Octavia Spencer (2017)

Mila Kunis (2018)

Bryce Dallas Howard (2019)

Elizabeth Banks (2020)

v

t

e

Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Actress

Florinda Bolkan (1975)

Liv Ullmann (1976)

Shelley Duvall (1977)

Jane Fonda (1978)

Sally Field (1979)

Sissy Spacek (1980)

Meryl Streep (1981)

Meryl Streep (1982)

Shirley MacLaine (1983)

Kathleen Turner (1984)

Meryl Streep (1985)

Sandrine Bonnaire (1986)

Holly Hunter / Sally Kirkland (1987)

Christine Lahti (1988)

Andie MacDowell / Michelle Pfeiffer (1989)

Anjelica Huston (1990)

Mercedes Ruehl (1991)

Emma Thompson (1992)

Holly Hunter (1993)

Jessica Lange (1994)

Elisabeth Shue (1995)

Brenda Blethyn (1996)

Helena Bonham Carter (1997)

Fernanda Montenegro / Ally Sheedy (1998)

Hilary Swank (1999)

Julia Roberts (2000)

Sissy Spacek (2001)

Julianne Moore (2002)

Naomi Watts (2003)

Imelda Staunton (2004)

Vera Farmiga (2005)

Helen Mirren (2006)

Marion Cotillard (2007)

Sally Hawkins (2008)

Yolande Moreau (2009)

Kim Hye-ja (2010)

Yoon Jeong-hee (2011)

Jennifer Lawrence / Emmanuelle Riva (2012)

Cate Blanchett / Adèle Exarchopoulos (2013)

Patricia Arquette (2014)

Charlotte Rampling (2015)

Isabelle Huppert (2016)

Sally Hawkins (2017)

Olivia Colman (2018)

Mary Kay Place (2019)

v

t

e

NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Actress in a Motion Picture

Estelle Evans (1969)

Barbara McNair (1970)

Jane Fonda (1971)

Diana Ross (1972)

No Award (1973)

Ester Anderson (1974)

Diahann Carroll (1975)

Denise Nicholas (1976)

Cicely Tyson (1977)

Cicely Tyson (1978)

Mavis Washington (1979)

Irene Cara (1980)

No Award (1981)

Jayne Kennedy (1982)

Jennifer Beals (1983)

Alfre Woodard (1984)

Tina Turner (1985)

Whoopi Goldberg (1986)

Traci Wolfe (1987)

Whoopi Goldberg (1988)

Ruby Dee (1989)

No Award (1990)

No Award (1991)

Whoopi Goldberg (1992)

Whoopi Goldberg (1993)

Angela Bassett (1994)

No Award (1995)

Angela Bassett (1996)

Whitney Houston (1997)

Vanessa Williams (1998)

Angela Bassett (1999)

Nia Long (2000)

Sanaa Lathan (2001)

Halle Berry (2002)

Angela Bassett (2003)

Queen Latifah (2004)

Kerry Washington (2005)

Kimberly Elise (2006)

Keke Palmer (2007)

Jurnee Smollett (2008)

Rosario Dawson (2009)

Gabourey Sidibe (2010)

Halle Berry (2011)

Viola Davis (2012)

Viola Davis (2013)

Angela Bassett (2014)

Taraji P. Henson (2015)

Sanaa Lathan (2016)

Taraji P. Henson (2017)

Octavia Spencer (2018)

Amandla Stenberg (2019)

Lupita Nyong'o (2020)

v

t

e

National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Actress

Sylvie (1966)

Bibi Andersson (1967)

Liv Ullmann (1968)

Vanessa Redgrave (1969)

Glenda Jackson (1970)

Jane Fonda (1971)

Cicely Tyson (1972)

Liv Ullmann (1973)

Liv Ullmann (1974)

Isabelle Adjani (1975)

Sissy Spacek (1976)

Diane Keaton (1977)

Ingrid Bergman (1978)

Sally Field (1979)

Sissy Spacek (1980)

Marília Pêra (1981)

Meryl Streep (1982)

Debra Winger (1983)

Vanessa Redgrave (1984)

Vanessa Redgrave (1985)

Chloe Webb (1986)

Emily Lloyd (1987)

Judy Davis (1988)

Michelle Pfeiffer (1989)

Anjelica Huston (1990)

Alison Steadman (1991)

Emma Thompson (1992)

Holly Hunter (1993)

Jennifer Jason Leigh (1994)

Elisabeth Shue (1995)

Emily Watson (1996)

Julie Christie (1997)

Ally Sheedy (1998)

Reese Witherspoon (1999)

Laura Linney (2000)

Naomi Watts (2001)

Diane Lane (2002)

Charlize Theron (2003)

Imelda Staunton / Hilary Swank (2004)

Reese Witherspoon (2005)

Helen Mirren (2006)

Julie Christie (2007)

Sally Hawkins (2008)

Yolande Moreau (2009)

Giovanna Mezzogiorno (2010)

Kirsten Dunst (2011)

Emmanuelle Riva (2012)

Cate Blanchett (2013)

Marion Cotillard (2014)

Charlotte Rampling (2015)

Isabelle Huppert (2016)

Sally Hawkins (2017)

Olivia Colman (2018)

Mary Kay Place (2019)

v

t

e

Inductees to the National Women's Hall of Fame

1970–1979

1973 
Jane Addams

Marian Anderson

Susan B. Anthony

Clara Barton

Mary McLeod Bethune

Elizabeth Blackwell

Pearl S. Buck

Rachel Carson

Mary Cassatt

Emily Dickinson

Amelia Earhart

Alice Hamilton

Helen Hayes

Helen Keller

Eleanor Roosevelt

Florence Sabin

Margaret Chase Smith

Elizabeth Cady Stanton

Helen Brooke Taussig

Harriet Tubman

1976 
Abigail Adams

Margaret Mead

Mildred "Babe" Didrikson Zaharias

1979 
Dorothea Dix

Juliette Gordon Low

Alice Paul

Elizabeth Bayley Seton

1980–1989

1981 
Margaret Sanger

Sojourner Truth

1982 
Carrie Chapman Catt

Frances Perkins

1983 
Belva Lockwood

Lucretia Mott

1984 
Mary "Mother" Harris Jones

Bessie Smith

1986 
Barbara McClintock

Lucy Stone

Harriet Beecher Stowe

1988 
Gwendolyn Brooks

Willa Cather

Sally Ride

Ida B. Wells-Barnett

1990–1999

1990 
Margaret Bourke-White

Barbara Jordan

Billie Jean King

Florence B. Seibert

1991 
Gertrude Belle Elion

1993 
Ethel Percy Andrus

Antoinette Blackwell

Emily Blackwell

Shirley Chisholm

Jacqueline Cochran

Ruth Colvin

Marian Wright Edelman

Alice Evans

Betty Friedan

Ella Grasso

Martha Wright Griffiths

Fannie Lou Hamer

Dorothy Height

Dolores Huerta

Mary Jacobi

Mae Jemison

Mary Lyon

Mary Mahoney

Wilma Mankiller

Constance Baker Motley

Georgia O'Keeffe

Annie Oakley

Rosa Parks

Esther Peterson

Jeannette Rankin

Ellen Swallow Richards

Elaine Roulet

Katherine Siva Saubel

Gloria Steinem

Helen Stephens

Lillian Wald

Madam C. J. Walker

Faye Wattleton

Rosalyn S. Yalow

Gloria Yerkovich

1994 
Bella Abzug

Ella Baker

Myra Bradwell

Annie Jump Cannon

Jane Cunningham Croly

Catherine East

Geraldine Ferraro

Charlotte Perkins Gilman

Grace Hopper

Helen LaKelly Hunt

Zora Neale Hurston

Anne Hutchinson

Frances Wisebart Jacobs

Susette La Flesche

Louise McManus

Maria Mitchell

Antonia Novello

Linda Richards

Wilma Rudolph

Betty Bone Schiess

Muriel Siebert

Nettie Stevens

Oprah Winfrey

Sarah Winnemucca

Fanny Wright

1995 
Virginia Apgar

Ann Bancroft

Amelia Bloomer

Mary Breckinridge

Eileen Collins

Elizabeth Hanford Dole

Anne Dallas Dudley

Mary Baker Eddy

Ella Fitzgerald

Margaret Fuller

Matilda Joslyn Gage

Lillian Moller Gilbreth

Nannerl O. Keohane

Maggie Kuhn

Sandra Day O'Connor

Josephine St. Pierre Ruffin

Pat Schroeder

Hannah Greenebaum Solomon

1996 
Louisa May Alcott

Charlotte Anne Bunch

Frances Xavier Cabrini

Mary A. Hallaren

Oveta Culp Hobby

Wilhelmina Cole Holladay

Anne Morrow Lindbergh

Maria Goeppert Mayer

Ernestine Louise Potowski Rose

Maria Tallchief

Edith Wharton

1998 
Madeleine Albright

Maya Angelou

Nellie Bly

Lydia Moss Bradley

Mary Steichen Calderone

Mary Ann Shadd Cary

Joan Ganz Cooney

Gerty Cori

Sarah Grimké

Julia Ward Howe

Shirley Ann Jackson

Shannon Lucid

Katharine Dexter McCormick

Rozanne L. Ridgway

Edith Nourse Rogers

Felice Schwartz

Eunice Kennedy Shriver

Beverly Sills

Florence Wald

Angelina Grimké Weld

Chien-Shiung Wu

2000–2009

2000 
Faye Glenn Abdellah

Emma Smith DeVoe

Marjory Stoneman Douglas

Mary Dyer

Sylvia A. Earle

Crystal Eastman

Jeanne Holm

Leontine T. Kelly

Frances Oldham Kelsey

Kate Mullany

Janet Reno

Anna Howard Shaw

Sophia Smith

Ida Tarbell

Wilma L. Vaught

Mary Edwards Walker

Annie Dodge Wauneka

Eudora Welty

Frances E. Willard

2001 
Dorothy H. Andersen

Lucille Ball

Rosalynn Carter

Lydia Maria Child

Bessie Coleman

Dorothy Day

Marian de Forest

Althea Gibson

Beatrice A. Hicks

Barbara Holdridge

Harriet Williams Russell Strong

Emily Howell Warner

Victoria Woodhull

2002 
Paulina Kellogg Wright Davis

Ruth Bader Ginsburg

Katharine Graham

Bertha Holt

Mary Engle Pennington

Mercy Otis Warren

2003 
Linda G. Alvarado

Donna de Varona

Gertrude Ederle

Martha Matilda Harper

Patricia Roberts Harris

Stephanie L. Kwolek

Dorothea Lange

Mildred Robbins Leet

Patsy Takemoto Mink

Sacagawea

Anne Sullivan

Sheila E. Widnall

2005 
Florence Ellinwood Allen

Ruth Fulton Benedict

Betty Bumpers

Hillary Clinton

Rita Rossi Colwell

Mother Marianne Cope

Maya Y. Lin

Patricia A. Locke

Blanche Stuart Scott

Mary Burnett Talbert

2007 
Eleanor K. Baum

Julia Child

Martha Coffin Pelham Wright

Swanee Hunt

Winona LaDuke

Elisabeth Kübler-Ross

Judith L. Pipher

Catherine Filene Shouse

Henrietta Szold

2009 
Louise Bourgeois

Mildred Cohn

Karen DeCrow

Susan Kelly-Dreiss

Allie B. Latimer

Emma Lazarus

Ruth Patrick

Rebecca Talbot Perkins

Susan Solomon

Kate Stoneman

2010–2019

2011 
St. Katharine Drexel

Dorothy Harrison Eustis

Loretta C. Ford

Abby Kelley Foster

Helen Murray Free

Billie Holiday

Coretta Scott King

Lilly Ledbetter

Barbara A. Mikulski

Donna E. Shalala

Kathrine Switzer

2013 
Betty Ford

Ina May Gaskin

Julie Krone

Kate Millett

Nancy Pelosi

Mary Joseph Rogers

Bernice Sandler

Anna Schwartz

Emma Willard

2015 
Tenley Albright

Nancy Brinker

Martha Graham

Marcia Greenberger

Barbara Iglewski

Jean Kilbourne

Carlotta Walls LaNier

Philippa Marrack

Mary Harriman Rumsey

Eleanor Smeal

2017 
Matilda Cuomo

Temple Grandin

Lorraine Hansberry

Victoria Jackson

Sherry Lansing

Clare Boothe Luce

Aimee Mullins

Carol Mutter

Janet Rowley

Alice Waters

2019 
Gloria Allred

Angela Davis

Sarah Deer

Jane Fonda

Nicole Malachowski

Rose O'Neill

Louise Slaughter

Sonia Sotomayor

Laurie Spiegel

Flossie Wong-Staal

v

t

e

New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress

Greta Garbo (1935)

Luise Rainer (1936)

Greta Garbo (1937)

Margaret Sullavan (1938)

Vivien Leigh (1939)

Katharine Hepburn (1940)

Joan Fontaine (1941)

Agnes Moorehead (1942)

Ida Lupino (1943)

Tallulah Bankhead (1944)

Ingrid Bergman (1945)

Celia Johnson (1946)

Deborah Kerr (1947)

Olivia de Havilland (1948)

Olivia de Havilland (1949)

Bette Davis (1950)

Vivien Leigh (1951)

Shirley Booth (1952)

Audrey Hepburn (1953)

Grace Kelly (1954)

Anna Magnani (1955)

Ingrid Bergman (1956)

Deborah Kerr (1957)

Susan Hayward (1958)

Audrey Hepburn (1959)

Deborah Kerr (1960)

Sophia Loren (1961)

No Award (1962)

Patricia Neal (1963)

Kim Stanley (1964)

Julie Christie (1965)

Elizabeth Taylor/Lynn Redgrave (1966)

Edith Evans (1967)

Joanne Woodward (1968)

Jane Fonda (1969)

Glenda Jackson (1970)

Jane Fonda (1971)

Liv Ullmann (1972)

Joanne Woodward (1973)

Liv Ullmann (1974)

Isabelle Adjani (1975)

Liv Ullmann (1976)

Diane Keaton (1977)

Ingrid Bergman (1978)

Sally Field (1979)

Sissy Spacek (1980)

Glenda Jackson (1981)

Meryl Streep (1982)

Shirley MacLaine (1983)

Peggy Ashcroft (1984)

Norma Aleandro (1985)

Sissy Spacek (1986)

Holly Hunter (1987)

Meryl Streep (1988)

Michelle Pfeiffer (1989)

Joanne Woodward (1990)

Jodie Foster (1991)

Emma Thompson (1992)

Holly Hunter (1993)

Linda Fiorentino (1994)

Jennifer Jason Leigh (1995)

Emily Watson (1996)

Julie Christie (1997)

Cameron Diaz (1998)

Hilary Swank (1999)

Laura Linney (2000)

Sissy Spacek (2001)

Diane Lane (2002)

Hope Davis (2003)

Imelda Staunton (2004)

Reese Witherspoon (2005)

Helen Mirren (2006)

Julie Christie (2007)

Sally Hawkins (2008)

Meryl Streep (2009)

Annette Bening (2010)

Meryl Streep (2011)

Rachel Weisz (2012)

Cate Blanchett (2013)

Marion Cotillard (2014)

Saoirse Ronan (2015)

Isabelle Huppert (2016)

Saoirse Ronan (2017)

Regina Hall (2018)

Lupita Nyong'o (2019)

v

t

e

People's Choice Award for Favorite Movie Actress

Barbra Streisand (1975)

Katharine Hepburn (1976)

Barbra Streisand (1977)

Barbra Streisand (1978)

Olivia Newton-John (1979)

Jane Fonda (1980)

Jane Fonda / Goldie Hawn (1981)

Jane Fonda / Sally Field (1982)

Jane Fonda / Katharine Hepburn (1983)

Meryl Streep (1984)

Meryl Streep (1985)

Meryl Streep (1986)

Meryl Streep (1987)

Glenn Close (1988)

Meryl Streep (1990)

Julia Roberts (1991)

Whoopi Goldberg (1993)

Sandra Bullock (1996)

Sandra Bullock (1997)

Julia Roberts (1998)

Sandra Bullock (1999)

Julia Roberts (2000)

Julia Roberts (2001)

Julia Roberts (2002)

Julia Roberts (2003)

Julia Roberts (2004)

Julia Roberts (2005)

Reese Witherspoon (2006)

Jennifer Aniston (2007)

Reese Witherspoon (2008)

Reese Witherspoon (2009)

Sandra Bullock (2010)

Kristen Stewart (2011)

Emma Stone (2012)

Jennifer Lawrence (2013)

Sandra Bullock (2014)

Jennifer Lawrence (2015)

Sandra Bullock (2016)

Jennifer Lawrence (2017)

Authority control 
BIBSYS: 90053956

BNE: XX1037716

BNF: cb12606222s (data)

CANTIC: a10085932

CiNii: DA0199582X

GND: 118534238

ISNI: 0000 0001 2278 393X

LCCN: n79103680

LNB: 000081031

NDL: 00439801

NKC: jn20000700546

NLA: 35091788

NLG: 89505

NLI: 002189983

NLK: KAC199608993

NSK: 000083693

NTA: 072900865

SELIBR: 223965

SNAC: w6640fpd

SUDOC: 066909457

Trove: 824215

ULAN: 500282661

VIAF: 37036983

 WorldCat Identities: lccn-n79103680
