"Psychiatrist and philosopher from Germany

Karl Jaspers

Jaspers in 1946

Born Karl Theodor Jaspers

(1883-02-23)23 February 1883

Oldenburg, German Empire

Died 26 February 1969(1969-02-26) (aged 86)

Basel, Switzerland

Education University of Heidelberg

(MD, 1908)

Era 20th-century philosophy

Region Western philosophy

School Neo-Kantianism (early)

Existentialism (late)

Existential phenomenology (late)

Main interests

Psychiatry, theology, philosophy of history

Notable ideas

Axial Age; coining the term Existenzphilosophie; Dasein and Existenz as the two states of being, subject–object split (Subjekt-Objekt-Spaltung); theory of communicative transcendence, limit situation

Influences

Meister Eckhart, Nicolaus Cusanus, Spinoza, Immanuel Kant, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Max Weber, Søren Kierkegaard, Friedrich Nietzsche, Martin Heidegger

Influenced

Hannah Arendt, Paul Ricoeur, Hans-Georg Gadamer, William A. Earle

Karl Theodor Jaspers (/ˈjæspərz/; German: ; 23 February 1883 – 26 February 1969) was a German-Swiss psychiatrist and philosopher who had a strong influence on modern theology, psychiatry, and philosophy. After being trained in and practicing psychiatry, Jaspers turned to philosophical inquiry and attempted to discover an innovative philosophical system. He was often viewed as a major exponent of existentialism in Germany, though he did not accept the label.

Contents

1 Biography

2 Contributions to psychiatry

3 Contributions to philosophy and theology

4 Political views

5 Influences

6 Selected bibliography

7 References

8 Further reading

9 External links

Biography

Karl Jaspers in 1910

Jaspers was born in Oldenburg in 1883 to a mother from a local farming community, and a jurist father. He showed an early interest in philosophy, but his father's experience with the legal system undoubtedly influenced his decision to study law at the University of Heidelberg. Jaspers first studied law in Heidelberg and later in Munich for three semesters. It soon became clear that Jaspers did not particularly enjoy law, and he switched to studying medicine in 1902 with a thesis about criminology. In 1910 he married Gertrud Mayer (1879–1974), the sister of his close friends Gustav Mayer and Ernst Mayer.

Jaspers earned his medical doctorate from the University of Heidelberg medical school in 1908 and began work at a psychiatric hospital in Heidelberg under Franz Nissl, successor of Emil Kraepelin and Karl Bonhoeffer, and Karl Wilmans. Jaspers became dissatisfied with the way the medical community of the time approached the study of mental illness and gave himself the task of improving the psychiatric approach. In 1913 Jaspers habilitated at the philosophical faculty of the Heidelberg University and gained there in 1914 a post as a psychology teacher. The post later became a permanent philosophical one, and Jaspers never returned to clinical practice. During this time Jaspers was a close friend of the Weber family (Max Weber also having held a professorship at Heidelberg).

In 1921, at the age of 38, Jaspers turned from psychology to philosophy, expanding on themes he had developed in his psychiatric works. He became a philosopher, in Germany and Europe.

After the Nazi seizure of power in 1933, Jaspers was considered to have a "Jewish taint" (jüdische Versippung, in the jargon of the time) due to his Jewish wife, and was forced to retire from teaching in 1937. In 1938 he fell under a publication ban as well. Many of his long-time friends stood by him, however, and he was able to continue his studies and research without being totally isolated. But he and his wife were under constant threat of removal to a concentration camp until 30 March 1945, when Heidelberg was liberated by American troops.

In 1948 Jaspers moved to the University of Basel in Switzerland. In 1963 he was awarded the honorary citizenship of the city of Oldenburg in recognition of his outstanding scientific achievements and services to occidental culture. He remained prominent in the philosophical community and became a naturalized citizen of Switzerland living in Basel until his death on his wife's 90th birthday in 1969.

Contributions to psychiatry

Jaspers' dissatisfaction with the popular understanding of mental illness led him to question both the diagnostic criteria and the methods of clinical psychiatry. He published a paper in 1910 in which he addressed the problem of whether paranoia was an aspect of personality or the result of biological changes. Although it did not broach new ideas, this article introduced a rather unusual method of study, at least according to the norms then prevalent. Not unlike Freud, Jaspers studied patients in detail, giving biographical information about the patients as well as notes on how the patients themselves felt about their symptoms. This has become known as the biographical method and now forms a mainstay of psychiatric and above all psychotherapeutic practice.

Karl Jaspers: Allgemeine Psychopathologie, first print 1913

Jaspers set down his views on mental illness in a book which he published in 1913, General Psychopathology. This work has become a classic in the psychiatric literature and many modern diagnostic criteria stem from ideas found within it. One of Jaspers' central tenets was that psychiatrists should diagnose symptoms of mental illness (particularly of psychosis) by their form rather than by their content. For example, in diagnosing a hallucination, it is more important to note that a person experiences visual phenomena when no sensory stimuli account for them, than to note what the patient sees. What the patient sees is the "content", but the discrepancy between visual perception and objective reality is the "form".

Jaspers thought that psychiatrists could diagnose delusions in the same way. He argued that clinicians should not consider a belief delusional based on the content of the belief, but only based on the way in which a patient holds such a belief. (See delusion for further discussion.) Jaspers also distinguished between primary and secondary delusions. He defined primary delusions as autochthonous, meaning that they arise without apparent cause, appearing incomprehensible in terms of a normal mental process. (This is a slightly different use of the word autochthonous than the ordinary medical or sociological use as a synonym for indigenous.) Secondary delusions, on the other hand, he defined as those influenced by the person's background, current situation or mental state.

Jaspers considered primary delusions to be ultimately "un-understandable", since he believed no coherent reasoning process existed behind their formation. This view has caused some controversy, and the likes of R. D. Laing and Richard Bentall (1999, p. 133–135) have criticised it, stressing that this stance can lead therapists into the complacency of assuming that because they do not understand a patient, the patient is deluded and further investigation on the part of the therapist will have no effect. For instance Huub Engels (2009) argues that schizophrenic disordered speech may be understandable, just as Emil Kraepelin's dream speech is understandable.

Contributions to philosophy and theology

Most commentators associate Jaspers with the philosophy of existentialism, in part because he draws largely upon the existentialist roots of Nietzsche and Kierkegaard, and in part because the theme of individual freedom permeates his work. In Philosophy (3 vols, 1932), Jaspers gave his view of the history of philosophy and introduced his major themes. Beginning with modern science and empiricism, Jaspers points out that as we question reality, we confront borders that an empirical (or scientific) method simply cannot transcend. At this point, the individual faces a choice: sink into despair and resignation, or take a leap of faith toward what Jaspers calls Transcendence. In making this leap, individuals confront their own limitless freedom, which Jaspers calls Existenz, and can finally experience authentic existence.

Transcendence (paired with the term The Encompassing in later works) is, for Jaspers, that which exists beyond the world of time and space. Jaspers' formulation of Transcendence as ultimate non-objectivity (or no-thing-ness) has led many philosophers to argue that ultimately, Jaspers became a monist, though Jaspers himself continually stressed the necessity of recognizing the validity of the concepts both of subjectivity and of objectivity.

Although he rejected explicit religious doctrines, including the notion of a personal God, Jaspers influenced contemporary theology through his philosophy of transcendence and the limits of human experience. Mystic Christian traditions influenced Jaspers himself tremendously, particularly those of Meister Eckhart and of Nicholas of Cusa. He also took an active interest in Eastern philosophies, particularly Buddhism, and developed the theory of an Axial Age, a period of substantial philosophical and religious development. Jaspers also entered public debates with Rudolf Bultmann, wherein Jaspers roundly criticized Bultmann's "demythologizing" of Christianity. (See Myth and Christianity: An Inquiry into the Possibility of Religion without Myth – a debate between Jaspers and Bultmann, The Noonday Press, New York, 1958)

Jaspers wrote extensively on the threat to human freedom posed by modern science and modern economic and political institutions. During World War II, he had to abandon his teaching post because his wife was Jewish. After the war he resumed his teaching position, and in his work The Question of German Guilt he unabashedly examined the culpability of Germany as a whole in the atrocities of Hitler's Third Reich.

The following quote about the Second World War and its atrocities was used at the end of the sixth episode of the BBC documentary series The Nazis: A Warning from History: "That which has happened is a warning. To forget it is guilt. It must be continually remembered. It was possible for this to happen, and it remains possible for it to happen again at any minute. Only in knowledge can it be prevented." 

Jaspers' major works, lengthy and detailed, can seem daunting in their complexity. His last great attempt at a systematic philosophy of Existenz – Von Der Wahrheit (On Truth) – has not yet appeared in English. However, he also wrote shorter works, most notably, Philosophy is for Everyman. The two major proponents of phenomenological hermeneutics, namely Paul Ricoeur (a student of Jaspers) and Hans-Georg Gadamer (Jaspers' successor at Heidelberg), both display Jaspers' influence in their works.

Political views

Jaspers identified with the liberal political philosophy of Max Weber, although he rejected Weber's nationalism. He valued humanism and cosmopolitanism and, influenced by Immanuel Kant, advocated an international federation of states with shared constitutions, laws, and international courts. He strongly opposed totalitarian despotism and warned about the increasing tendency towards technocracy, or a regime that regards humans as mere instruments of science or of ideological goals. He was also skeptical of majoritarian democracy. Thus, he supported a form of governance that guaranteed individual freedom and limited government, and shared Weber's belief that democracy needed to be guided by an intellectual elite. His views were seen as anti-communist.

Influences

Jaspers held Kierkegaard and Nietzsche to be two of the most important figures in post-Kantian philosophy. In his compilation, The Great Philosophers (Die großen Philosophen), he wrote: "I approach the presentation of Kierkegaard with some trepidation. Next to Nietzsche, or rather, prior to Nietzsche, I consider him to be the most important thinker of our post-Kantian age. With Goethe and Hegel, an epoch had reached its conclusion, and our prevalent way of thinking – that is, the positivistic, natural-scientific one – cannot really be considered as philosophy." Jaspers also questions whether the two philosophers could be taught. For Kierkegaard, at least, Jaspers felt that Kierkegaard's whole method of indirect communication precludes any attempts to properly expound his thought into any sort of systematic teaching.

Though Jaspers was certainly indebted to Kierkegaard and Nietzsche, he also owes much to more traditional philosophers, especially Kant and Plato. Walter Kaufmann argues in From Shakespeare to Existentialism that, though Jaspers was certainly indebted to Kierkegaard and Nietzsche, he was closest to Kant's philosophy:

Jaspers is too often seen as the heir of Nietzsche and Kierkegaard to whom he is in many ways less close than to Kant ... the Kantian antinomies and Kant's concern with the realm of decision, freedom, and faith have become exemplary for Jaspers. And even as Kant "had to do away with knowledge to make room for faith," Jaspers values Nietzsche in large measure because he thinks that Nietzsche did away with knowledge, thus making room for Jaspers' "philosophic faith" ...

In his essay "On My Philosophy", Jaspers states: "While I was still at school Spinoza was the first. Kant then became the philosopher for me and has remained so...Nietzsche gained importance for me only late as the magnificent revelation of nihilism and the task of overcoming it." Jaspers is also indebted to his contemporaries, such as Heinrich Blücher from who he borrowed the term, "the anti-political principle" to describe totalitarianism's destruction of a space of resistance.

Selected bibliography

Original German

Psychologie der Weltanschauungen

Nikolaus Cusanus

Translations

Philosophy of Existence – ISBN 0-8122-1010-7, University of Pennsylvania Press, 1971

Strindberg and Van Gogh: An Attempt of a Pathographic Analysis with Reference to Parallel Cases of Swedenborg and Holderlin – ISBN 0-8165-0608-6

Reason and Existenz – ISBN 0-87462-611-0

Way to Wisdom – ISBN 0-300-00134-7

Socrates, Buddha, Confucius, Jesus – ISBN 0-15-683580-0

Philosophy Is for Everyman

Man in the Modern Age

The Origin and Goal of History (1949; English translation: 1953)

Nietzsche: An Introduction to the Understanding of His Philosophical Activity – ISBN 0-8018-5779-1, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997 (University of Arizona Press, 1965)

Jaspers, Karl (1953). The Origin and Goal of History. translated by Michael Bullock. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Jaspers, Karl (1955). Reason and Existenz. translated by William Earle. New York: Noonday Press.

Jaspers, Karl (1958). The Future of Mankind. translated by E. B. Ashton. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Jaspers, Karl (1997). General Psychopathology – Volumes 1 & 2. translated by J. Hoenig and Marian W. Hamilton. Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University Press.

References

^ a b c d e f g h i Karl Jaspers. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ Ernesto Spinelli (2007). Practising Existential Psychotherapy: The Relational World, Sage, p. 52: "Karl Jaspers can be considered to be among the earliest direct attempts to apply existential phenomenology to psychotherapy".

^ Martin Heidegger and Karl Jaspers, The Heidegger–Jaspers Correspondence (1920–1963), Humanity Books, 2003.

^ "Duden | Karl | Rechtschreibung, Bedeutung, Definition". Duden (in German). Retrieved 22 October 2018. Kạrl

^ "Duden | Jaspers | Rechtschreibung, Bedeutung, Definition". Duden (in German). Archived from the original on 22 October 2018. Retrieved 22 October 2018. Jạspers

^ Lewis, T.T. (2019). "Karl Jaspers". Salem Press Biographical Encyclopedia. Retrieved 30 January 2020.

^ Radkau, Joachim (1995). Max Weber: A Biography. Polity Press. ISBN 978-0745683423. p. 29.

^ "1963: Prof. Dr. Dr. h.c. Karl Jaspers". Stadt Oldenburg (in German). Oldenburg. Archived from the original on 23 October 2017.

^ Celinscak, Mark (2015). Distance from the Belsen Heap: Allied Forces and the Liberation of a Concentration Camp. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. ISBN 978-1-4426-1570-0.

^ Jones, Ian (26 August 2000). "The Nazis: A Warning from History". Off the Telly. Archived from the original on 23 November 2011. Retrieved 10 June 2013.

^ Schilpp, Paul Arthur, ed. (1977). The Philosophy of Karl Jaspers. Open Court Publishing Company. pp. 57–58.

^ Carter, April (2013). The Political Theory of Global Citizenship. Routledge. pp. 147–148.

^ Blanchot, Maurice (1997) . “Apocalypse is disappointing.” Friendship. Translated by Rottenberg. Stanford University Press. pp. 101–108. ISBN 0804727597.

^ Kaufmann, Walter A. (1980) From Shakespeare To Existentialism: An Original Study, Princeton University Press. ISBN 0691013675. p. 285.

^ Jaspers, Karl (1941). "On My Philosophy".

^ Hans Mommsen, "Interpretation of the Holocaust as a Challenge to Human Existence", in Arendt in Jerusalem, ed. Ascheim, p. 227

Further reading

Claudio Fiorillo, Fragilità della verità e comunicazione. La via ermeneutica di Karl Jaspers, ISBN 978-8-87999-463-7 Rome, Ed. Aracne, 2003.

Azurmendi, Joxe: "Bakearen inguruko diskurtsoaren jasangaitza" about Die Schuldfrage (Jaspers, 1946) in Barkamena, kondena, tortura, Donostia, Elkar: 2012 ISBN 978-84-9027-007-3

Engels, Huub (2009). Emil Kraepelins Traumsprache: erklären und verstehen. In Dietrich von Engelhardt und Horst-Jürgen Gerigk (ed.). Karl Jaspers im Schnittpunkt von Zeitgeschichte, Psychopathologie, Literatur und Film. p. 331-43. ISBN 978-3-86809-018-5 Heidelberg: Mattes Verlag.

Miron, Ronny, Karl Jaspers: From Selfhood to Being. Amsterdam/New York, NY, Rodopi: 2012

Xavier Tilliette, Karl Jaspers, Aubier, coll. « Théologie », 1960

External links

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Karl Jaspers.

 Wikiquote has quotations related to: Karl Jaspers

Publications by and about Karl Jaspers in the catalogue Helveticat of the Swiss National Library

Existential Primer: Karl Jaspers

Bibliografia di Karl Jaspers ed. by Claudio Fiorillo in Dialegesthai

Current scholarly research on Jaspers (in English) is organized by the Karl Jaspers Society of North America and published in Existenz.

Translation into English of Jaspers' 1958 peace prize acceptance speech Truth, Freedom, and Peace.

The Philosophy Of Karl Jaspers edited by Paul Arthur Schilpp 1957

Newspaper clippings about Karl Jaspers in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW

Karl Jaspers: Philosopher of Otherness at the New Acropolis Online Library

v

t

e

Continental philosophy

Philosophers 
Theodor W. Adorno

Giorgio Agamben

Louis Althusser

Hannah Arendt

Raymond Aron

Gaston Bachelard

Alain Badiou

Roland Barthes

Georges Bataille

Jean Baudrillard

Zygmunt Bauman

Walter Benjamin

Simone de Beauvoir

Henri Bergson

Maurice Blanchot

Pierre Bourdieu

Martin Buber

Judith Butler

Albert Camus

Georges Canguilhem

Ernst Cassirer

Cornelius Castoriadis

Emil Cioran

Benedetto Croce

Paul de Man

Guy Debord

Gilles Deleuze

Jacques Derrida

Wilhelm Dilthey

Hubert Dreyfus

Divya Dwivedi

Umberto Eco

Terry Eagleton

Friedrich Engels

Frantz Fanon

Johann Gottlieb Fichte

Michel Foucault

Hans-Georg Gadamer

Giovanni Gentile

Félix Guattari

Antonio Gramsci

Jürgen Habermas

G. W. F. Hegel

Martin Heidegger

Edmund Husserl

Roman Ingarden

Luce Irigaray

Fredric Jameson

Karl Jaspers

Walter Kaufmann

Søren Kierkegaard

Ludwig Klages

Pierre Klossowski

Alexandre Kojève

Alexandre Koyré

Leszek Kołakowski

Julia Kristeva

Jacques Lacan

Philippe Lacoue-Labarthe

François Laruelle

Bruno Latour

Henri Lefebvre

Claude Lévi-Strauss

Emmanuel Levinas

Niklas Luhmann

György Lukács

Jean-François Lyotard

Gabriel Marcel

Herbert Marcuse

Karl Marx

Quentin Meillassoux

Maurice Merleau-Ponty

Shaj Mohan

Jean-Luc Nancy

Antonio Negri

Friedrich Nietzsche

José Ortega y Gasset

Jacques Rancière

Paul Ricœur

Edward Said

Jean-Paul Sartre

F. W. J. Schelling

Carl Schmitt

Arthur Schopenhauer

Michel Serres

Gilbert Simondon

Peter Sloterdijk

Oswald Spengler

Edith Stein

Leo Strauss

Simone Weil

Raymond Williams

Slavoj Žižek

Theories 
Absurdism

Critical theory

Deconstruction

Existentialism

Frankfurt School

German idealism

Hegelianism

Hermeneutics

Marxism

Neo-Kantianism

New Philosophers

Non-philosophy

Phenomenology

Postmodernism

Post-structuralism

Psychoanalytic theory

Romanticism

Social constructionism

Speculative realism

Structuralism

Western Marxism

Concepts 
Alterity

Angst

Apollonian and Dionysian

Authenticity

Being in itself

Boredom

Class struggle

Dasein

Death of God

Death drive

Différance

Difference

Existence precedes essence

Existential crisis

Facticity

Genealogy

Habitus

Historical materialism

Ideology

Intersubjectivity

Leap of faith

Master–slave dialectic

Master–slave morality

Oedipus complex

Ontic

Other

Power

Ressentiment

Self-deception

Totalitarianism

Trace

Transvaluation of values

Will to power

Category

Index

v

t

e

Existentialism

Concepts 
Abandonment

Absurdism

Angst

Authenticity

Bad faith

Being in itself

Existence precedes essence

Existential crisis

Facticity

Meaning

Nihilism

Other

Thinkers 
Nicola Abbagnano

Hannah Arendt

Abdel Rahman Badawi

Hazel Barnes

Karl Barth

Nikolai Berdyaev

Steve Biko

Martin Buber

Rudolf Bultmann

Dino Buzzati

Albert Camus

Jane Welsh Carlyle

Thomas Carlyle

Emil Cioran

Walter A. Davis

Simone de Beauvoir

Fyodor Dostoevsky

William A. Earle

Ralph Ellison

Frantz Fanon

Vilém Flusser

Benjamin Fondane

James Anthony Froude

Alberto Giacometti

Juozas Girnius

Lewis Gordon

Martin Heidegger

Edmund Husserl

Eugène Ionesco

Nae Ionescu

William James

Karl Jaspers

Franz Kafka

Walter Kaufmann

Søren Kierkegaard

Ladislav Klíma

Emmanuel Levinas

Ash Lieb

John Macquarrie

Naguib Mahfouz

Gabriel Marcel

Vytautas Mačernis

Maurice Merleau-Ponty

Friedrich Nietzsche

José Ortega y Gasset

Viktor Petrov

Franz Rosenzweig

Jean-Paul Sartre

Aous Shakra

Lev Shestov

Joseph B. Soloveitchik

Paul Tillich

Rick Turner

Miguel de Unamuno

John Daniel Wild

Colin Wilson

Richard Wright

Peter Wessel Zapffe

Related 
Phenomenology (philosophy)

Continental philosophy

Transcendentalism

German idealism

Western Marxism

Existentialist anarchism

Existential nihilism

Atheistic existentialism

v

t

e

Philosophy of science

Concepts 
Analysis

Analytic–synthetic distinction

A priori and a posteriori

Causality

Commensurability

Consilience

Construct

Creative synthesis

Demarcation problem

Empirical evidence

Explanatory power

Fact

Falsifiability

Feminist method

Functional contextualism

Ignoramus et ignorabimus

Inductive reasoning

Intertheoretic reduction

Inquiry

Nature

Objectivity

Observation

Paradigm

Problem of induction

Scientific law

Scientific method

Scientific revolution

Scientific theory

Testability

Theory choice

Theory-ladenness

Underdetermination

Unity of science

Metatheory

of science 
Coherentism

Confirmation holism

Constructive empiricism

Constructive realism

Constructivist epistemology

Contextualism

Conventionalism

Deductive-nomological model

Hypothetico-deductive model

Inductionism

Epistemological anarchism

Evolutionism

Fallibilism

Foundationalism

Instrumentalism

Pragmatism

Model-dependent realism

Naturalism

Physicalism

Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism

Rationalism / Empiricism

Received view / Semantic view of theories

Scientific realism / Anti-realism

Scientific essentialism

Scientific formalism

Scientific skepticism

Scientism

Structuralism

Uniformitarianism

Vitalism

Philosophy of 
Physics
thermal and statistical

Motion

Chemistry

Biology

Geography

Social science

Technology
Engineering

Artificial intelligence

Computer science

Information

Mind

Psychiatry

Psychology

Perception

Space and time

Related topics 
Alchemy

Criticism of science

Descriptive science

Epistemology

Faith and rationality

Hard and soft science

History and philosophy of science

History of science

History of evolutionary thought

Logic

Metaphysics

Normative science

Pseudoscience

Relationship between religion and science

Rhetoric of science

Science studies

Sociology of scientific knowledge

Sociology of scientific ignorance

Philosophers of science by era

Ancient 
Plato

Aristotle

Stoicism

Epicureans

Medieval 
Averroes

Avicenna

Roger Bacon

William of Ockham

Hugh of Saint Victor

Dominicus Gundissalinus

Robert Kilwardby

Early modern 
Francis Bacon

Thomas Hobbes

René Descartes

Galileo Galilei

Pierre Gassendi

Isaac Newton

David Hume

Late modern 
Immanuel Kant

Friedrich Schelling

William Whewell

Auguste Comte

John Stuart Mill

Herbert Spencer

Wilhelm Wundt

Charles Sanders Peirce

Wilhelm Windelband

Henri Poincaré

Pierre Duhem

Rudolf Steiner

Karl Pearson

Contemporary 
Alfred North Whitehead

Bertrand Russell

Albert Einstein

Otto Neurath

C. D. Broad

Michael Polanyi

Hans Reichenbach

Rudolf Carnap

Karl Popper

Carl Gustav Hempel

W. V. O. Quine

Thomas Kuhn

Imre Lakatos

Paul Feyerabend

Jürgen Habermas

Ian Hacking

Bas van Fraassen

Larry Laudan

Daniel Dennett

Category

 Philosophy portal

 Science portal

Authority control 
BIBSYS: 90080383

BNE: XX1147422

BNF: cb11908645d (data)

CANTIC: a11339329

GND: 118557106

HDS: 041197

ISNI: 0000 0001 2126 6033

LCCN: n78095410

MusicBrainz: 690f33ac-f4ff-4a78-abfc-15c67849f6ee

MGP: 170807

NDL: 00444583

NKC: jn19990003999

NLA: 35243871

NLI: 000070880

NLK: KAC199613798

NTA: 173690041

SELIBR: 191544

SNAC: w6571s9q

SUDOC: 026935996

Trove: 879578

VIAF: 31998030

 WorldCat Identities: lccn-n78095410
