"Main articles: History of Laos since 1945, First Indochina War, North Vietnamese invasion of Laos, Vietnam War, and Ho Chi Minh trail

Laotian Civil War

Part of the Vietnam War, the Indochina Wars, and the Cold War

Laos

Date 23 May 1959 – 2 December 1975

(16 years, 6 months, 1 week and 2 days)

Location Laos

Result 
Pathet Lao and North Vietnamese victory

Establishment of the Lao People's Democratic Republic

Exile of the Kingdom of Laos

Belligerents

 Kingdom of Laos

Forces Armées Neutralistes

(from 1962)

United States

South Vietnam

Thailand

Supported by:

 Philippines

Taiwan

Australia

New Zealand

 Pathet Lao

Forces Armées Neutralistes

(1960–1962)

Patriotic Neutralists

(from 1963)

North Vietnam

Supported by:

 China

Soviet Union

Romania

Commanders and leaders

 Souvanna Phouma

Phoumi Nosavan

Vang Pao

Boun Oum

Lyndon B. Johnson

Richard Nixon 
 Souphanouvong

Kaysone Phomvihane

Phoumi Vongvichit

Võ Nguyên Giáp

Strength

 50,000 soldiers (1954)

21,000 mercenaries (1963)

19,000–23,000 Hmong militiamen (1964) 
 8,000 (1960)

48,000 (1970)

Casualties and losses

 ~15,000 Royal Lao Army 
 Unknown

3,000+

20,000–62,000 total dead

v

t

e

Indochina Wars

Masterdom

First

Second

Laotian Civil War

Cambodian Civil War

Third

Khmer Rouge–Vietnamese

Cambodian–Thai border

Sino-Vietnamese

border conflicts

Hmong insurgency

FULRO insurgency against Vietnam

v

t

e

Military engagements of the Laotian Civil War

North Vietnamese invasion
Hotfoot

1960 Laotian coups (Battle of Vientiane)

Battle of Ban Pa Dong

Battle of Luang Namtha

Momentum

Pincushion

Battle of Lak Sao

Hardnose

Wapi

1964 Laotian coups

Triangle

Unity

1965 Laotian coups

Star

Battle of Nam Bac

Battles of Nakhang

1966 Laotian coup

Ban Naden raid

1967 Opium War

Sone Pet

Battle of Ban Houei Sane

Battle of Lima Site 85

Pigfat

Junction City Jr.

Toan Thang

Left Jab

Off Balance

About Face

139

Diamond Arrow

Snake Eyes

Maeng Da

Honorable Dragon

Tailwind

Counterpunch

Tchepone

Copper

Silver Buckle

74B

Lam Son 719

Desert Rat

Xien Dong

Phoutah

Phiboonpol

Sayasila

Phou Khao Kham

Sourisak Montry VIII

Bedrock

Thao La

Z

Maharat

Sinsay

Strength I

Strength II

Fa Ngum

Black Lion

Phou Phiang II

Black Lion III

972

Maharat II

Phou Phiang III

1973 Laotian coup

Air operations

Booster Shot

Millpond

Barrel Roll

Steel Tiger

Pony Express

Tiger Hound

Project 404

Commando Hunt

Raindance

Menu

The Laotian Civil War (1959–1975) was a civil war in Laos fought between the Communist Pathet Lao (including many North Vietnamese of Lao ancestry) and the Royal Lao Government from 23 May 1959 to 2 December 1975. It is associated with the Cambodian Civil War and the Vietnam War, with both sides receiving heavy external support in a proxy war between the global Cold War superpowers. It is called the Secret War among the CIA Special Activities Division and Hmong veterans of the conflict.

The Kingdom of Laos was a covert theater for other belligerents during the Vietnam War. The Franco–Lao Treaty of Amity and Association (signed 22 October 1953) transferred remaining French powers to the Royal Lao Government (except control of military affairs), establishing Laos as an independent member of the French Union. However, this government did not include representatives from the Lao Issara anti-colonial armed nationalist movement.

The following years were marked by a rivalry between the neutralists under Prince Souvanna Phouma, the right wing under Prince Boun Oum of Champassak, and the left-wing Lao Patriotic Front under Prince Souphanouvong and half-Vietnamese future Prime Minister Kaysone Phomvihane. Several attempts were made to establish coalition governments, and a "tri-coalition" government was finally seated in Vientiane.

The actual fighting in Laos involved the North Vietnamese Army, U.S. troops and Thai forces and South Vietnamese army forces directly and through irregular proxies in a struggle for control over the Laotian Panhandle. The North Vietnamese Army occupied the area to use for its Ho Chi Minh Trail supply corridor and as staging area for offensives into South Vietnam. There was a second major theater of action on and near the northern Plain of Jars.

The North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao eventually emerged victorious in 1975, as part of the general communist victory in all of former French Indochina that year. A total of up to 300,000 people from Laos fled to neighboring Thailand following the Pathet Lao takeover.

After the communists took power in Laos, Hmong rebels fought the new government. The Hmong were persecuted as traitors and "lackeys" of the Americans, with the government and its Vietnamese allies carrying out human rights abuses against Hmong civilians. The incipient conflict between Vietnam and China also played a role with Hmong rebels being accused of receiving support from China. Over 40,000 people died in the conflict.

The Lao royal family were arrested by the Pathet Lao after the war and sent to labor camps, where most of them died in the late 1970s and 1980s, including King Savang Vatthana, Queen Khamphoui, and Crown Prince Vong Savang.

Contents

1 Overview

2 Chronology of the Laotian Civil War

2.1 1945: Prelude to war

2.2 1946: French return; Vietnamese arrive

2.3 1947–1952: Build-up of forces

2.4 1953–1954: First North Vietnamese invasion and French defeat

2.5 1955–1958: The lull

2.6 1959: Second North Vietnamese invasion

2.7 1960: The neutralist coup

2.8 1961: Superpowers' involvement deepens

2.9 1962: Disaster and a new government

2.10 1963: Stasis

2.11 1964–1965: Escalation and U.S. Air Force involvement

2.11.1 Operations Steel Tiger and Tiger Hound

2.12 1966–1967

2.13 1968: Royal Lao Army neutralized

2.14 1969–1972

2.15 1973–1974

2.16 Taking of Vientiane

3 Evacuation of the Hmong

4 Aftermath

4.1 Plight of Hmong and other U.S.-allied veterans

4.2 Unexploded bombs

5 See also

6 Notes

7 References

7.1 Government documents

7.2 Histories

7.3 Memoirs

7.4 Secondary sources

8 External links

Overview

Main articles: Operation Barrel Roll and Operation Steel Tiger

Part of a series on the

History of Laos

Lan Xang Era

 Lan Xang 1353–1707

Regional Kingdoms Era

 Kingdom of Vientiane 1707–1828

Kingdom of Luang Phrabang 1707–1893

Muang Phuan 1707–1899

Kingdom of Champasak 1713–1904

Colonial Era

 Lao rebellion 1826–1828

Haw wars 1865–1890

Franco-Siamese War 1893

French Protectorate of Laos 1893–1953

Franco-Thai War 1940–1941

Free Lao Movement (Lao Issara) 1945–1949

Modern Era

 Kingdom of Laos 1946–1975

Laotian Civil War 1953–1975

North Vietnamese invasion of Laos 1958–1959

Anti-Communist Insurgency 1975–2007

Lao People's Democratic Republic 1975–1991

Laos after Soviet dominance 1991–present

See also

History of Laos

History of Isan

v

t

e

The Geneva Conference established Laotian neutrality. The People's Army of Vietnam (PAVN), however, continued to operate in both northern and southeastern Laos. There were repeated attempts from 1954 onward to force the North Vietnamese out of Laos, but regardless of any agreements or concessions, Hanoi had no intention of withdrawing from the country or abandoning its Laotian communist allies.

North Vietnam established the Ho Chi Minh trail as a paved highway in southeast Laos paralleling the Vietnamese border. The trail was designed to transport North Vietnamese troops and supplies to the Republic of Vietnam, as well as to aid the National Liberation Front (Viet Cong).

North Vietnam also had a sizable military effort in northern Laos, while sponsoring and maintaining an indigenous communist rebellion, the Pathet Lao, to put pressure on the Royal Lao Government.

The U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), in an attempt to disrupt these operations in northern Laos without direct military involvement, responded by training a guerrilla force of about thirty thousand Laotian hill tribesmen, mostly local Hmong (Meo) tribesmen along with the Mien and Khmu, led by Royal Lao Army General Vang Pao, a Hmong military leader. This army, supported by the CIA proprietary airline Air America, Thailand, the Royal Lao Air Force, and a covert air operation directed by the United States ambassador to Laos, fought the People's Army of Vietnam, the National Liberation Front (NLF), and their Pathet Lao allies to a seesaw stalemate, greatly aiding U.S. interests in the war in Vietnam.

The status of the war in the north throughout the year generally depended on the weather. As the dry season started, in November or December, so did North Vietnamese military operations, as fresh troops and supplies flowed down out of North Vietnam on newly passable routes, either down from Dien Bien Phu, across Phong Saly Province on all-weather highways, or on Route 7 through Ban Ban, Laos on the northeast corner of the Plain of Jars. The CIA's covert operation's clandestine army would give way, harrying the PAVN and Pathet Lao as they retreated; Raven Forward Air Controllers would direct massive air strikes against the communists by USAF jets and RLAF T-28s to prevent the capture of the Laotian capitals of Vientiane and Luang Prabang. When the rainy season six months later rendered North Vietnamese supply lines impassable, the Vietnamese communists would recede toward Vietnam.

The war in the southeastern panhandle against the Ho Chi Minh Trail was primarily a massive air interdiction program by the USAF and United States Navy because political constraints kept the trail safe from ground assault from South Vietnam. Raven FACs also directed air strikes in the southeast. Other Forward Air Controllers from South Vietnam, such as Covey FACs from the 20th Tactical Air Support Squadron and Nail FACs from the 23rd Tactical Air Support Squadron, also directed strikes. Other air strikes were planned ahead. Overall coordination of the air campaign was directed by an Airborne Command and Control Center, such as those deployed in Operation Igloo White.

The existence of the conflict in Laos was sometimes reported in the U.S., and described in press reports as the CIA's "Secret War in Laos" because details were largely unavailable due to official government denials that the war existed. The denials were seen as necessary considering that the North Vietnamese government and the U.S. had both signed agreements specifying the neutrality of Laos. U.S. involvement was considered necessary because the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV) had effectively conquered a large part of the country and was equally obfuscating its role in Laos. Despite these denials, however, the civil war was the largest U.S. covert operation prior to the Soviet–Afghan War, with areas of Laos controlled by North Vietnam subjected to years of intense U.S. aerial bombardment, representing the heaviest bombing campaign in history. Overshadowing it all was the struggle of the Cold War, with the United States' policy of the containment of communism and the policies of the People's Republic of China and the Soviet Union of spreading communism via subversion and insurgency.

Chronology of the Laotian Civil War

Main articles: List of military operations of the Laotian Civil War and History of Laos since 1945

1945: Prelude to war

The end of World War II left Laos in political chaos. The French, who had been displaced from their protectorate by the Japanese, wanted to resume control of Laos, and sponsored guerrilla forces to regain control. The Japanese had proclaimed Laos independent even as they lost the war. Though King Sisavang Vong thought Laos was too small for independence, he had proclaimed the end of the French protectorate status while simultaneously favoring the French return. He let it be known he would accept independence if it should occur. Thus there was a nascent movement for independence amid the turmoil.

Underlying all this was a strong undercurrent of Vietnamese involvement. Sixty percent of the population of Laos's six urban areas were Vietnamese, with the Vietnamese holding key positions in the civil bureaucracies and the police. Since the 1930s the Indochinese Communist Party had established wholly Vietnamese cells in Laos.

Prince Phetsarath Ratanavongsa, as Viceroy and Prime Minister, established the Lao royal treasury account with the Indochinese treasury in Hanoi in an attempt to establish a functional economy.

French commandos parachuted into Laos beginning in 1945 to organize guerrilla forces. By November, they had formed the guerrillas into four light infantry battalions of the newly founded French Union Army. The officers and sergeants of the new Lao battalions were French.

In October 1945, a Lao nationalist movement called Lao Issara (Free Laos) was founded as a new government for Laos. Among Lao Issara's prominent members were three European-educated princes; brothers Phetsarath Ratanavongsa and Souvanna Phouma, and their half brother, Souphanouvong. The former became the titular founder of Lao Issara. Souphanouvong became commander in chief, as well as minister of foreign affairs. Souvanna Phouma became minister of public works.

Independence began with an uprising of the Vietnamese residents in Savannakhet. Prince Souphanouvong took command of a band of partisans armed with weapons looted from the local militia. The band moved northward to the administrative capitol of Vientiane with its provisional revolutionary government. Souphanouvong then urged the signing of a military cooperation treaty with the newly established North Vietnamese communist government, which was done. The French military mission was escorted out of Laos into Thailand by a contingent of Chinese troops.

However, the Lao Issara never gained more than a tenuous hold on the entirety of Laos. Roving Viet Minh detachments ruled the northeast, but the Viet Minh declined to aid the new government. Chinese troops, including the Chinese Nationalist 93rd Division, occupied cities as far south as Luang Prabang. The French-sponsored guerrillas controlled the southern provinces of Savannakhet and Khammouan. Prince Boun Oum, who sympathized with the French, occupied the rest of the southern panhandle.

For these, and other reasons, Lao Issara could not hold the country against the returning French colonial government and its troops. The French negotiated a Chinese withdrawal from Laos prior to their own return, removing them from the field.

1946: French return; Vietnamese arrive

In January 1946, the French began the reconquest of Laos by sweeping the Bolovens Plateau. They had organized six battalions of light infantry, to which they added a minor force of French troops.

On 21 March 1946, Souphanouvong and his largely Vietnamese force fought the French Union troops at Savannakhet, to no avail; the attackers mustered paratroopers, artillery, armored cars, and Spitfire fighter-bombers. The Lao Issara troops suffered 700 killed. They fled, leaving behind 250 bodies and 150 prisoners.

On 24 April, the French dropped a paratroop battalion on the outskirts of Vientiane, and took the city without resistance. On 9 May, they repeated their airborne tactics with a drop outside Luang Prabang. This was coupled with a thrust to the north by the French forces, from Vientiane to Luang Prabang, that chased Phetsarath Ratanavongsa and the Lao Issara ministers out of Laos. The king reinstated the French rule by repudiating his actions that had been pressured from him by the Japanese, Chinese, and Lao Issara.

By September 1946, the Lao Issara had been defeated and had fled to exile in Bangkok. One of its splinter groups, led by Thao O Anourack, fled to Hanoi.
There he allied himself with two men trusted by Ho Chi Minh; Nouhak Phoumsavanh was Vietnamese, and Kaysone Phomvihane was Vietnamese-Lao. These three men founded the military movement that would become the Pathet Lao (Land of Laos).

Thao O Anourack established the initial Pathet Lao base at Con Cuong, Vietnam. Kaysone Phomvihane organized the first detachment of the new force. By the end of 1946, at least 500 Viet Minh agents had crossed into Laos.

1947–1952: Build-up of forces

Main articles: Royal Lao Army and Pathet Lao

On 11 May 1947, King Sisavang Vong granted a constitution declaring Laos an independent nation within the French Union. This began the building of a new government over the next few years, including the establishment of a national army, the Armée Nationale Laotienne, which was the first iteration of the Royal Lao Army.

The nascent army was plagued by lack of Lao leadership, and its weaponry was a hodgepodge. Thus
the new Armée Nationale Laotienne consisted of light infantry battalions officered by the French. There was one paratroop battalion included. The French began training Lao officers and non-commissioned officers even as they continued to lead and train the new army.

In opposition, the Viet Minh raised a subsidiary revolutionary movement, the Pathet Lao, starting with an initial guerrilla band of 25 in January 1949.

In October 1949, the exiled Lao Issara dissolved and the three royal brothers each chose a separate destiny.

Phetsarath Rattanavongsa chose to remain in Bangkok. His stay was temporary. He would once again become the viceroy of Laos.

Souvanna Phouma chose to return to Laos via an amnesty, believing that the Lao would soon free themselves. In 1951 he became Prime Minister for the first time and held that office until 1954.

Souphanouvong, who had spent seven years in Nha Trang during his sixteen years in Vietnam, met Ho Chi Minh, and acquired a Vietnamese wife while in Vietnam, solicited Viet Minh aid in founding a guerrilla force.

In August 1950, Souphanouvong had joined the Viet Minh in their headquarters north of Hanoi, Vietnam, and become the head of the Pathet Lao, along with its political arm dubbed Neo Lao Hak Sat (Lao Patriotic Front). This was an attempt to give a false front of authority to the Lao communist movement by claiming to represent a united non-partisan effort. Two of its most important founders were members of the Indochinese Communist Party, which advocated overthrow of the monarchy as well as expulsion of the French. This got Laos involved in the First Indochina War but it started off mainly against the French.

On 23 December 1950, the Pentalateral Mutual Defense Assistance Pact was signed by the United States, France, Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos; it was a tool to transfer American military aid to the French war effort in Indochina. This year also marked the infiltration of at least 5,000 more Viet Minh into Laos.

In February 1951, the Indochinese Communist Party decided to split in three to sponsor war against the French in Cambodia and Laos, along with the war in Vietnam. The new Laotian branch consisted of 2,091 members, but included only 31 Lao.

Also, by 1951, the Pathet Lao had mustered sufficient trained troops to join the Viet Minh in military operations.

By October 1951, the Armée Nationale Laotienne had raised two more battalions of infantry and began training a battalion of paratroops. The ANL ended the year with a strength of 5,091.

By the end of 1952, the Royal Lao Army had grown to include a battalion of troops commanded by Laotian officers, as well as 17 other companies.

1953–1954: First North Vietnamese invasion and French defeat

French General Salan and Prince Sisavang in the Lao capital, Luang Prabang, 4 May 1953

In April, 1953, the Viet Minh's People's Army of Vietnam (PAVN) invaded the northeastern part of what was still the French Protectorate of Laos with 40,000 troops commanded by General Võ Nguyên Giáp; including 2,000 Pathet Lao soldiers led by Souphanouvong. The objective of the two-pronged invasion was the capture of the royal capital of Luang Prabang and of the Plain of Jars. In 9 November the Pathet Lao began its conflict with the Kingdom of Laos thus beginning the civil war and technically the Second Indochina War while the First Indochina War was still going.

They were opposed by 10,000 Lao troops and 3,000 French regulars.

The North Vietnamese invaders succeeded in conquering the border provinces of Phongsali and Xam Neua, which were adjacent to northern Vietnam and on the northeastern verge of the Plain of Jars. They then moved aside to allow the Pathet Lao force with its mismatched scrounged equipment to occupy the captured ground, and Souphanouvong moved the Pathet Lao headquarters into Xam Neua on 19 April.

The other strike, moving from Điện Biên Phủ and aimed downriver at Luang Prabang, was thwarted by oncoming monsoons and resistance by the French.

Pathet Lao soldiers in Xam Neua, 1953

The Vietnamese invasion was stalled, but only because the French had airlifted in battalions of Foreign Legionnaires and Moroccan Tirailleurs.

In December, the French Union Army, as part of its attempt to protect Laos from the PAVN, recaptured the Dien Bien Phu valley.

Main article: Battle of Dien Bien Phu

In January 1954, the PAVN launched two assaults on Laos. One thrust crossed the top of the panhandle to the Mekong River town of Thakhek. The other was again aimed at Luang Prabang. Both were thwarted in a month.

These were diversions to the famous Battle of Dien Bien Phu, which took place from March through May 1954 within ten kilometers of the Lao border, on the lines of communication into the Plain of Jars. The ruggedness of the karst mountains of northern Laos channels movement into a few canyons; small watercraft could move from Điện Biên Phủ down to the Nam Ou, and thence directly downriver to Luang Prabang, or they cross into the PDJ via
Ban Ban.

The United States used Civil Air Transport, which later morphed into Air America, in a covert operation to fly supplies to the embattled French in Điện Biên Phủ. The PAVN also launched a diversionary thrust at Seno, Laos aimed at cutting away the panhandle from the main body of Laos. This thrust was foiled by paratroopers from the French Union's Army of the Republic of Vietnam.

When the relief troops failed to lift the siege in time, the French and their local allies lost the bastion of Điện Biên Phủ. One of the troopers in the relief column marching from Luang Prabang was a young Hmong named Vang Pao.

The French loss at Điện Biên Phủ marked the end of the First Indochina War; the French were driven to negotiate for peace. On 20 July, the Agreement on the Cessation of Hostilities in Laos was signed, ending French rule. Two months later, the North Vietnamese established a support group for Pathet Lao forces at Ban Nameo, well within northeastern Laos.

The Geneva Conference of 1954.

The Agreement radically changed the geography of Indochina, resulting in independence for Laos. On 1 August 1954 the French army withdrew from Laos declaring independence for the nation alongside North Vietnam, South Vietnam and Cambodia which ended the First Indochina War but the Laotian Civil War was still ongoing. The northern half of Vietnam became independent of the French imperialist enterprise and was ruled by an independent Vietnamese Communist government. Lao French Union troops joined the military of independent Laos, however France kept two military bases in Laos and maintained its "military advisors" in the new Lao military. The Royal Lao government military also received its first aircraft from the French in 1954; nine Morane-Saulnier MS-500 Criquets were supplied for support and medevac.

1955–1958: The lull

See also: Operation Booster Shot

In January, 1955, French advisors began training the first Lao aviation force. Later that year, Thailand would supply Sikorsky H-19 helicopters and volunteer pilots to the Lao military. The Thais also trained thirty Lao officers in weapons use at Hua Hin, Thailand.

In early 1955, a United States Operation Mission was set up in Laos. Its primary purpose was supply of military defense materials to the Royal Lao Government; 80% of its budget was dedicated to this purpose. The United States paid 100% of the Lao military budget. However, the embassy staff was not up to monitoring this program. There was an obvious need for a Military Assistance Advisory Group; however, the United States had signed a treaty that expressly forbade such.

U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower's solution was to establish the Programs Evaluation Office (PEO) in December, 1955, staffed by American civilians with prior military experience and headed up by retired Brigadier General Rothwell Brown. These civilians were given U.S. State Department status. However, they did not work strictly for the State Department. On military matters, they reported to the Commander in Chief Pacific Command, with information supplied to the American ambassador; on non-military matters, they reported directly to the ambassador.

1955 was also notable for the despatch of Royal Lao Government troops to Sam Neua and Phong Saly, which was much resented by the Pathet Lao. As a result of this resentment, and disputes about electoral procedures, the Laotian communists boycotted that year's national elections.

On 21 March 1956, Souvanna Phouma began his second term as prime minister. He opened a dialogue with his brother, Souphanouvong. In August, they announced the intention of declaring a ceasefire and reintegrating the Pathet Lao and their occupied territory into the government. However, the Pathet Lao claimed the right to administer the provinces they occupied.

At the same time, they and their North Vietnamese backers ran a massive recruitment campaign, with the aim of forming nine battalions of troops. Many of the new recruits were sent into North Vietnam for schooling and training. This led to United States concern that the Royal Lao Army would be inadequately equipped and trained because there was only one small French military mission working with the RLA.

In February, 1957, the Programs Evaluation Office personnel began supplying training materials to the French Military Mission that was charged with training the Royal Lao Army. The rationale was that improved training would better fit the army with defending its country. As part of this process, the United States even took over paying the Royal Lao Army's salaries.

Beginning in March, 1957, the Royal Lao Army began shuttling arms to Hmong guerrillas, to enable them to fight on the side of the RLA.

In November, 1957, a coalition government incorporating the Pathet Lao was finally established. Using the slogan, "one vote to the right, one vote to the left to prevent civil war", pro-communist parties received one-third of the popular vote and won 13 of 21 contested seats in the elections of 4 May 1958. With these additional seats, the left controlled a total of 16 seats in the 59 member National Assembly. Combined with independents, this was enough to deny Souvanna's center right, neutralist coalition the two-thirds majority it needed to form a government. With parliament deadlocked, the U.S. suspended aid in June to force a devaluation of the overpriced currency, which was leading to the abuse of U.S. aid. The National Assembly responded by confirming a right-wing government led by Phuy Xananikôn in August. This government included four members of the U.S.-backed Committee for the Defence of the National Interest (none of them National Assembly members). Three more unelected CDNI members were added in December, when Phuy received emergency powers to govern without the National Assembly.

In November, 1958, Brigadier General John A. Heintges reviewed the Programs Evaluation Office. He promptly replaced General Brown, and forged a new agreement with the Lao and the French. Integral to the new agreement was the displacement of the French military trainers by Americans. As a result, PEO expanded over twentyfold. Included in the expansion were 149 Special Forces on temporary duty, and 103 Filipino military veterans working for a newly formed front company named Eastern Construction Company in Laos.

1959: Second North Vietnamese invasion

Main articles: North Vietnamese invasion of Laos, Group 559, and Ho Chi Minh Trail

The Ho Chi Minh trail was used by Vietnamese and Laotian people from the very beginning. Captured Viet Cong, circa 1959

On 15 May 1959, the People's Army of Vietnam established Group 559; this unit was charged with the logistics of moving the necessities of war from North Vietnam to the South. Its foremost feat was building and maintaining the Ho Chi Minh trail down the eastern spine of Laos. Eventually, this transportation network would power the Vietnamese communists to victory. It would have to survive a relentless air campaign comparable to any interdiction bombing in World War II.

Also in May, the long-awaited integration of 1,500 Pathet Lao troops into the national army was scheduled. The U.S. embassy told the Lao government that it would be difficult to gain congressional approval of aid to Laos with communists serving in the army. The Pathet Lao stalled.

Under orders from Souphanouvong, the Pathet Lao battalions refused to be integrated into the Royal Lao Army. Souphanouvong was then arrested and imprisoned, along with his aides. The two Pathet Lao battalions, one after the other, escaped during the night with no shots fired, taking their equipment, families, and domestic animals with them. On 23 May, Souphanouvong and his companions also escaped unscathed.

In July, U.S. Special Forces Mobile Training Teams from the 77th Special Forces Group, working under the code name Hotfoot, began training the Royal Laotian army. The Green Berets were attached to the Programs Evaluation Office, and like other PEO employees, were nominal civilians and dressed as such.

The RLA was being formed into Groupement Mobiles—regimental-sized units of three battalions. The training teams were assigned one per GM, with some battalions also meriting a team.

On 28 July, PAVN units attacked all along the North Vietnamese-Lao border. As they took ground from the Royal Lao Army, they moved in Pathet Lao as occupation troops. Poor battle performance by the RLA seemed to verify the need for further training; the RLA outnumbered the attackers, but still gave ground.

Also in July, the American embassy began to contract for aerial resupply for RLA troops, hiring Robert Brongersma and his Beech 18.

In September, Group 100 was succeeded by Group 959; the North Vietnamese were upgrading their military mission to the Pathet Lao, just as the Americans had expanded PEO. Both sides were raising larger client armies, in hopes the Lao would fight.

1960: The neutralist coup

The Laotian Armed Forces training Center at Khang Khai, Laos, March 1960

On 9 August 1960, Captain Kong Le and his Special Forces-trained Neutralist paratroop battalion were able to seize control of the administrative capital of Vientiane in a virtually bloodless coup, while Prime Minister Tiao Samsanith, government officials, and military leaders met in the royal capital, Luang Prabang. His stated aim for the coup was an end to fighting in Laos, the end of foreign interference in his country, an end to the consequent corruption caused by foreign aid, and better treatment for his soldiers. However, Kong Le's coup did not end opposition to him, and there was a scramble among unit commanders to choose sides. If one was not pro-coup, then he had the further decision to make as to whom he would back to counter the coup. The front runner was General Phoumi Nosavan, first cousins with the prime minister of Thailand, Field Marshal Sarit Thanarat.

With Central Intelligence Agency's support, Field Marshal Sarit set up a covert Thai military advisory group, called Kaw Taw. Kaw Taw supported a counter-coup against the new Neutralist Lao government in Vientiane, supplying artillery, artillerymen, and advisers to Phoumi's forces. It also committed the CIA-sponsored Police Aerial Reinforcement Unit (PARU) to operations within Laos.

Alongside its covert Kaw Taw operation, immediately after Kong Le's coup the government of Thailand began an embargo via land blockade, cutting off the main source of imported goods for Vientiane. The United States Secretary of State, Christian Herter, stated that the United States supported the "legitimate government under the King's direction." The United States supported the pro-Western government of Prime Minister Tiao Samsanith while at the same time the CIA supported the covert counter-coup effort organized by Sarit against the Neutralist government in Vientiane.

The Neutralist forces in Vientiane organized the Executive Committee of the High Command of the Revolution as the interim government in Laos the following day. General Phoumi Nosavan, stated on 10 August that he planned to retake Vientiane by force. The United States Ambassador to Laos, Winthrop G. Brown, responded to General Phoumi by stating that the United States supported a restoration of peace "through quick and decisive action."

PEO had turned its support to General Phoumi. With the help of CIA front organization Air America and covert aid from Thailand, the general and his troops moved north toward Vientiane from Savannakhet in southern Laos, in November.

The Soviet Union began a military air bridge into Vientiane in early December; it was characterized as the largest Soviet airlift since World War II. This air bridge flew in PAVN artillery and gunners to reinforce the Neutralist/Pathet Lao coalition.

On their side, the United States flew four B-26 Invader bombers from Taiwan into Takhli Royal Thai Air Force Base, poised to strike into Laos. They were later joined by an additional eight B26s. With a dozen guns, half a dozen rockets, and a napalm canister apiece, they were a potent threat, but were never used.

On 13 December, Phoumi's army began a three-day bombardment of Vientiane. Five hundred civilians and seventeen of Kong Le's paratroopers were killed by the shellfire. On the 14th, a U.S. carrier task force went on alert, and the Second Airborne Brigade stood by to seize selected Laotian airfields. The U.S. was poised to rescue its paramilitary and diplomatic advisers in Laos.

Kong Le and his Neutralists finally withdrew northward to the Plain of Jars. Their withdrawal was covered by artillery fire from the PAVN 105 mm howitzers rushed in from Hanoi, and supported by Soviet airdrops of crucial supplies of rations, munitions, and radios. In the retreat, Kong Le picked up 400 recruits, swelling his force to 1,200 men.

Phoumi's coup was thus successful, but the end result was the alliance of the Neutralists with the Pathet Lao on 23 December. As 1960 ended, the nation of Laos had become an arena of confrontation for the world's superpowers.

1961: Superpowers' involvement deepens

Main article: Vang Pao

Beginning on 1 January, a new coalition of Kong Le's Neutralists, Pathet Lao, and PAVN drove 9,000 Royal Lao Army troops from the Plain of Jars.

On 3 January, the Royal Laotian Air Force (RLAF) received its first counter-insurgency aircraft, American-built T-6 Texans, via the Royal Thai Air Force (RTAF). These four reconfigured trainers were armed with two .30 caliber machine guns and five-inch rockets, and could carry 100-pound bombs. Four previously trained Lao pilots undertook transition training in Thailand; on 9 January, the pilots flew the new RLAF fighter-bombers to Vientiane. Two days later, they flew their first combat sorties, against PAVN and Pathet Lao covering Kong Le's retreat into the Plain of Jars.

Anti-communist Hmong guerrilla troops in 1961.

Russian Soviet air supply continued, bringing in heavy weapons to supplement the light arms previously delivered. On 7 January, the North Vietnamese presence was escalated by an additional four battalions; two of the battalions immediately moved to the point of conflict, on Route 7, which connected to Vientiane. A third PAVN battalion moved into action at Tha Thom, south of the Plain of Jars. On 15 January, the entire 925th Independent Brigade of the PAVN had crossed into Laos to reinforce the Pathet Lao/Neutralist coalition.

The U.S. decided to counter-escalate by airdropping arms to a force of 7,000 Hmong guerrillas later in the month. The U.S. Navy transferred four H-34 helicopters to CIA front organization Air America.

By the beginning of February 1961, the first four Thai pilots arrived to fly four more T-6s supplied to the Royal Laotian Air Force (RLAF). The Thai pilots had been officially discharged from the Royal Thai Air Force (RTAF) and held no official position in the RLAF. The growth of the RLAF would be nullified by its casualties, as five of the T-6s were lost in action by the end of March.

An inter-agency task force set up by the incoming Kennedy administration in early February undertook a two-month study of possible American responses to the Laotian civil war. Even as the French ended their training mission, American training efforts were ramped up: Sixteen H-34 helicopters were transferred from the U.S. Marine Corps to Air America; maintenance facilities were established at Udorn in northern Thailand, about 85 kilometres south of Vientiane. The most drastic alternative the task force envisioned was a 60,000 man commitment of American ground troops in southern Laos, with a possible use of nuclear weapons. These latter options were not elected. 

On 9 March, the communists captured the only road junction between Luang Prabang and Vientiane. When RLA troops were ordered to counterattack and retake the junction, they dropped their weapons and ran. Special Forces Team Moon was assigned as advisers to the RLA unit. On 22 April 1961, Team Moon was overrun. Two sergeants were killed, and team leader Captain Walter H. Moon was captured; he was later executed while trying to escape captivity. Another sergeant was released sixteen months later.

The Operation Millpond B-26s had been scheduled to strike at Kong Le, but the strike was stayed by an event on the far side of the world. The Bay of Pigs Invasion failed, and that failure gave pause to U.S. actions in Laos. A ceasefire was sought. Simultaneously, the Programs Evaluation Office shed its civilian guise and went above ground to become a Military Advisory Assistance Group. Emblematic of the change, the Hotfoot teams donned their U.S. uniforms and became White Star Mobile Training Teams.

The truce supposedly went into effect the first week of May, but was repeatedly breached by the communists. With the Royal Lao Army ineffective, the Hmong guerrillas were left as the only opposition to the communists. In early June, they were forced from their beleaguered position at the Ban Padong by an artillery barrage followed by a ground assault. Under command of General Vang Pao, they fell back to Long Tieng.

The U.S. Central Intelligence Agency had begun secretly recruiting Lao montagnards into 100 man militia companies. Riflemen trained for these militias would receive eight weeks basic training, then serve several months in their militia. Once they had that experience, which often included their first combat, they were further recruited into battalions of irregular troops called Special Guerrilla Units. The battalions were filled out along ethnic lines, most being Hmong, but some being Yao (Iu-Mien) or Lao Theung (Lao Saetern). SGUs, once formed up, underwent three further months training by Thai officers and sergeants in Phitsanuloke, Thailand.

By summer, the CIA had mustered 9,000 hill tribesmen into the ranks of the Armée Clandestine. It was aided by 9 CIA agents, 9 Special Forces augmenters, and 99 Thai Special Forces troopers from the Police Aerial Resupply Unit.

By autumn, the future course of American involvement was set. Paramilitary trainers would train guerrilla units, with resupply coming via airdrops, and specialized short takeoff and landing aircraft using makeshift dirt airstrips. Other trainers would try to mold the Royalist regulars into a fighting force. Fighter-bombers would serve as flying artillery to blast the communist forces into retreat or submission.

In December, the Royalists decided to assert control over the provincial capital of Nam Tha, which was on the northwestern border, almost in southern China. Laotian Army Groupement Mobiles (GMs) 11 and 18 were stationed there, and soon came under pressure from the communists.

1962: Disaster and a new government

See also: Battle of Luang Namtha

By February, the Royal Lao Government's hold on Nam Tha seemed tenuous enough that it was reinforced by the paratroopers of GM 15. That gave a numerical edge to the defenders and should have guaranteed Nam Tha's retention. The presence of armed American Special Forces advisors should have stiffened them with military expertise. In May, a PAVN assault broke the RLG forces and routed them. The Royalist soldiers fled southward across the entirety of northwestern Laos into Thailand, a retreat of over a hundred miles.

Faced with this fiasco, the U.S. and other foreign powers pressured the RLG into a coalition with the Pathet Lao and Kong Le's Forces Armee Neutrale. This technically fulfilled the Geneva Agreements on Laos and triggered the treaty requirement that foreign military technicians be withdrawn from Laos by October. The United States disbanded its Military Assistance Advisory Group and withdrew its military mission. The Vietnamese communists did not; they repatriated only a token 40 technicians out of an estimated 2,000.

July 1962 saw the field tests of Pilatus Porter Short Takeoff and Landing aircraft by Bird and Sons. The original two Porters' performance was degraded by heat and height robbing power from engine performance. One of the Porters crashed in December, killing all on board.

Several companies of hill tribes irregulars were sent to Hua Hin, Thailand for training.

1963: Stasis

See also: Battle of Lak Sao

By the middle of the year, the Pathet Lao and Neutralists had begun to squabble with one another. The neutralist group was soon divided between right-leaning neutralists (headed by Kong Le) and left-leaning neutralists (headed by Quinim Polsena and Colonel Deuane Sunnalath). On 12 February 1963 Kong Le's second in command, Colonel Ketsana, was assassinated. Shortly afterwards Quinim Polsena and his deputy were also assassinated. The neutralist camp was split with some going over to the Pathēt Lao. Fighting between the Pathet Lao and government troops soon resumed.

Vang Pao gathered three SGU battalions into Groupement Mobile 21 and spearheaded a drive into Sam Neua against the Pathet Lao. His offensive was resupplied by supplies airdropped by the civilian aircraft of Air America and Bird and Sons.

In the meantime, the United States re-established a Military Assistance Advisory Group to support its efforts in Laos, basing it in Bangkok. The Requirements Office of the U.S. Embassy in Vientiane was manned by civilians and monitored the need for U.S. military aid to Laos.

In August, the Royal Laotian Air Force received its first four T-28 Trojans that had been adapted for counter-insurgency warfare.

The irregular companies trained the previous year in Thailand were now formed into a battalion called SGU 1. Irregular forces proliferated throughout the country. In Military Regions 3 and 4, action, intelligence, and road watch teams infiltrated the Ho Chi Minh Trail.

In December, Vang Pao was promoted to Brigadier General by King Sisavong.

1964–1965: Escalation and U.S. Air Force involvement

Main article: Operation Barrel Roll

Barrel Roll operational area, 1964

On 1 April, the USAF set up Project Waterpump, which was a pilot training program in Udorn Royal Thai Air Force Base to supply Lao pilots for the Royal Laotian Air Force. The RLAF also began augmenting its ranks with Thai volunteer pilots in 1964.

Run by a 41-man team from Detachment 6 of the 1st Air Commando Wing, this facility was an end run around the treaty obligation that forbade training in Laos. Besides training pilots, Waterpump encouraged cooperation between the RLAF and the Royal Thai Air Force. It was also tasked, as a last resort, to augment the RLAF to counter a renewed Communist offensive in Laos.

In Laos itself, there was an effort to train Laotians as forward air guides. Meantime, the Butterfly forward air control program began.

Even as the air commandos established themselves in Udorn and Laos, several Lao generals attempted a coup in Vientiane. With the capital in turmoil, the Communists on the Plain of Jars attacked and overran the Royalist and Neutralist positions. The United States then released the necessary ordnance for the RLAF to bomb Communist encampments, beginning on 18 May.

On 19 May, the United States Air Force began flying mid and low-level missions over the renewed fighting, under the code name Yankee Team. They also began reconnaissance missions over the Laotian panhandle to obtain target information on men and material being moved into South Vietnam over the Ho Chi Minh Trail. By this time, the footpaths on the trail had been enlarged to truck roads, with smaller paths for bicycles and walking. The Trail had become the major artery for use by North Vietnam to infiltrate South Vietnam.

On 9 June, U.S. President Lyndon B. Johnson ordered an F-100 strike against the enemy in retaliation for the shoot down of another U.S. aircraft.

The summer of 1964 was marked by a successful attack by the Forces Armee Royale. Operation Triangle cleared one of the few roads in Laos; Route 13 connected the administrative capitol of Vientiane with the royal capitol of Luang Prabang.

The Plain of Jars activities expanded by December 1964, were named Operation Barrel Roll, and were under the control of the U.S. ambassador to Laos, who approved all targets before they were attacked.

Operations Steel Tiger and Tiger Hound

Main articles: Operation Steel Tiger and Operation Tiger Hound

Barrel Roll and Steel Tiger operational area, 1965.

1965 began with an event that showed how the commanding generals of the five military regions of Laos were essentially warlords of their own domains.

In February, Commanding General of Military Region 5 Kouprasith Abhay mounted a coup against the group of generals who had attempted a coup the previous year. Among the losers fleeing into exile were General Phoumi Nosavan.

On 3 April, the U.S. began Operation Steel Tiger over the Laotian panhandle and the Vietnamese DMZ to locate and destroy enemy forces and materiel being moved southward at night on the Ho Chi Minh Trail into South Vietnam. However, since circumstances made it a highly complex matter in regard to the apparent neutrality of Laos, target approval had to come from the U.S. government in Washington, D.C.. Additionally, the U.S. ambassadors in South Vietnam, Laos, and Thailand were involved in controlling these U.S. air operations.

Late in 1965, the communists greatly increased their infiltration along the Ho Chi Minh Trail. The United States decided to concentrate airpower upon a small segment of the Trail closest to South Vietnam and used most extensively by the enemy. As a result, Operation Tiger Hound was initiated in December 1965, utilizing aircraft from the Air Force, the United States Navy, and U.S. Marines, the Vietnamese Air Force, and the Royal Laotian Air Force. On 11 December, B-52 heavy bombers were called in to this tactical operation, in their first use over Laos.

From 1965 to 1973, the civil war moved back and forth in northern Laos, characterized by short but often very intense engagements.

1966–1967

See also: Battle of Nam Bac

Damage caused by a communist ground attack on Luang Prabang airfield, 1967

North Vietnamese troops march through Laos, 1967

In the far northwest, Team Fox, an intelligence team of Mien hill tribesmen began long range reconnaissance of southern China.

In July, Royal Lao Government (RLG) forces seized the Nam Bac Valley. Three Infantry Regiments, one independent infantry battalion, and one artillery battalion took Nam Bac and established a defensive line north of Luang Prabang.

On the Plain of Jars, the Pathet Lao advance gradually slowed due to the destruction of its supplies by airpower, and Laotian troops then counter-attacked. By August 1966, they had advanced to within 45 miles of the DRV border. North Vietnam then sent thousands of its regular troops into the battle and once again the Laotians were forced to retreat.

Steel Tiger operations continued down the length of the panhandle in 1966, with special emphasis upon the Tiger Hound area. Since most of the communist truck traffic was at night, the Air Force developed and began using special equipment to detect the nighttime traffic.

Barrel Roll, Steel Tiger and Tiger Hound operational areas.

In eastern Laos, U.S., Royal Laotian, and VNAF aircraft continued their attacks on traffic along the Ho Chi Minh Trail. During 1967, B-52s flew 1,718 sorties in this area, almost triple their 1966 record. The major targets were trucks which had to be hunted down and destroyed one-by-one. This seemed to be irrational thinking to many Americans flying these combat missions for these trucks could have been destroyed en masse before, during, or after their unloading from the freighters that had hauled them to North Vietnam if bombing of Haiphong had been permitted. The presence of Soviet, British, Greek and Panamanian neutral ships in Haiphong prevented any United States bombing for the duration of the war.

In northern Laos, the Communists continued their slow advance across the Plain of Jars in 1967. Laotian victories were few and far between, and by the end of the year, the situation had become critical even with the air support which had been provided by the Royal Lao Air Force.

Laotian tribal irregulars were operating out of Nam Bac, under CIA direction from Luang Prabang, some 60 miles south of the guerrilla base. In midyear, over the objections of Lao colonels, American advisors pressured Royal Lao troops into forming their smaller units into combat battalions. Despite the poor training of the Lao soldiers, some of whom had never fired a weapon, these raw new units were moved northward out of Luang Prabang over a several month period to garrison Nam Bac. By mid-October, some 4,500 government troops held the valley to secure the air strip for their resupply, a la Dien Bien Phu. The American intent was the establishment of Nam Bac as the keystone of an "iron arc" of defensive positions across northern Laos.

In response, the PAVN 316th Infantry Division was dispatched to Laos to assault Nam Bac. The Royalist garrison was soon surrounded. They had American-supplied 105 mm howitzers for artillery support. They could also call on Royal Lao Air Force T-28s for close air support. U.S. Air Force fighter-bombers struck the Communist supply lines. Communist gunfire closed the Nam Bac airstrip to fixed wing resupply. Air America copters flew in supplies and evacuated the wounded; American C-123s parachuted supplies ferried from Udorn RTAFB to the beleaguered government troops. The Royalist troops would not launch a clearing attack to regain use of the runway for resupply. On 25 December, a Vietnamese artillery barrage kicked off their offensive.

1968: Royal Lao Army neutralized

A map of the Ho Chi Minh Trail, 1967.

On 13 January the North Vietnamese launched a multi-division attack on the Royal Lao Army at Nam Bac, Laos. Some of the government troops began withdrawing from the valley. After about a third of the defenders had retreated, the final assault on the Royalist garrison came out of a heavy mist and hit the Royalist command post. Its communications with the defenders was cut; the rout was on. The heavy weapons and scale of the PAVN attack could not be matched by the national army and it was effectively sidelined for several years.

Most of the government soldiers scattered into the surrounding hills; about 200 of the defenders were killed in action. Of the 3,278 Royalist soldiers, only about a third returned to government service. The Royalists had suffered such a staggering defeat that their army never recovered; the government was left with only tribal irregulars using guerrilla tactics fighting on its side.

Throughout 1968, the communists slowly advanced across the northern part of Laos, defeating Laotian forces time and time again. An important U.S. navigation aids site fell in the Battle of Lima Site 85 on 10 March 1968. This success was achieved despite U.S. military advice and assistance. In November, the U.S. launched an air campaign against the Ho Chi Minh Trail because North Vietnam was sending more troops and supplies than ever along this route to South Vietnam. This new operation, named Operation Commando Hunt, continued until 1972, with little success.

1969–1972

A U.S. Air Force Bell UH-1P from the 20th Special Operations Squadron "Green Hornets" at a base in Laos, 1970.

On 23 March 1969, the Royal Lao Army launched a large attack (Kou Kiet Campaign) against the communists in the Plain of Jars/Xieng Khoang areas, supported by its own air units and the U.S. Air Force. In June, Pathet Lao and PAVN launched an attack of its own and gained ground, but by August, Royal Laotian forces attacked again and regained what had been lost. In all these operations, the U.S. Air Force flew hundreds of Barrel Roll missions; however, many were canceled because of poor weather.

Pathet Lao forces were supported by PAVN's 174th Vietnamese Volunteer Regiment. By September, the 174th had to fall back to regroup. In mid-September, they launched a counterattack and recovered the Plain of Jars. Forces participating in the campaign included the 316th and 312th Infantry Divisions, the 866th Infantry Regiment, the 16th Artillery Regiment, one tank company, six sapper and engineer battalions, one Nghệ An Province local force battalion, and ten PL battalions.

On 11 February, the offensive (Campaign 139) opened. By the 20th, control of the Plain of Jars was secure. RLG forces withdrew to Muong Xui. On 25 February, the RLG abandoned Xieng Khoang city. Xam Thong fell on 18 March and Long Tieng was threatened. On 25 April, the campaign ended. After the end of the campaign, the "316th Division, the 866th Regiment, and a number of specialty branch units were ordered to stay behind to work with our Lao friends."

At the beginning of 1970, fresh troops from North Vietnam advanced through northern Laos. The Air Force called in B-52s and, on 17 February, they were used to bomb targets in northern Laos. The enemy advance was halted by Laotian reinforcements, and for the remainder of the year it was a "seesaw" military campaign.

On 1 May, elements of SVN PAVN units (28th and 24A regiments) joined with North Vietnamese Army and Pathet Lao to seize Attopeu.

Although communist movements down the Ho Chi Minh Trail grew during the year, the U.S. war effort was reduced because authorities in Washington, believing the U.S. objectives in Southeast Asia were being achieved, imposed budget limits, which reduced the number of combat missions the USAF could fly.

Main article: Operation Lam Son 719

Because of significant logistical stockpiling by PAVN in the Laotian Panhandle, South Vietnam launched Operation Lam Son 719, a military thrust on 8 February 1971. Its goals were to cross into Laos toward the city of Tchepone and cut the Ho Chi Minh Trail, hopefully thwarting a planned North Vietnamese offensive. Aerial support by the U.S. was massive since no American ground units could participate in the operation. On 25 February, PAVN launched a counterattack, and in the face of heavy opposition, the South Vietnamese force withdrew from Laos after losing approximately a third of its men.

Combined offensive to take Plain of Jars.
On 18 December, PAVN and Pathet Lao forces launched counteroffensive (Campaign Z) to recover the Plain. Volunteer forces included the 312th and 316th Divisions, the 335th and 866th Infantry Regiments, and six artillery and tank battalions. Xam Thong fell and the push continued toward Long Tieng.

Lower Laos – the 968th Infantry Regiment and Pathet Lao forces reclaimed the Tha Teng and Lao Nam areas, and captured the Bolaven Plateau.

A Royal Lao Air Force (RLAF) North American T-28D-5 Trojan armed trainer loaded with bombs at Long Tieng airfield in Laos, September 1972

During the dry season 1971–72, PL/PAVN forces dug into defensive positions and fought for permanent control of the Plain of Jars. Units participating included the 316th Infantry Division, the 866th, 335th, and 88th Regiments, and nine specialty branch battalions under the command of Senior Colonel Le Linh. Seven PL battalions also participated.

On 21 May, RLG forces attempted to seize the Plain. The battle lasted 170 days (until 15 November 1972). The communists claimed to have killed 1,200 troops and captured 80.

When PAVN launched the Nguyễn Huệ Offensive (known in the West as the Easter Offensive) into South Vietnam on 30 March, massive U.S. air support was required inside South Vietnam and its air strikes in Laos dropped to their lowest point since 1965.

In northern Laos, the communists made additional gains during the year but failed to overwhelm government forces. In November, the Pathet Lao agreed to meet with Laotian government representatives to discuss a cease-fire.

The war had resulted in a large number of refugees with a peak number of 378,800 internally displaced persons under government control in October 1973.

1973–1974

Pathet Lao soldiers in Vientiane, Laos, 1973

Main article: Paris Peace Accord

The U.S. pulled out of Laos in 1973, as stipulated by the Paris Peace Accord. North Vietnam was not required to remove its forces under the terms of the treaty.

The national government was forced to accept the Pathet Lao into the government.
During 1974 and 1975 the balance of power in Laos shifted steadily in favour of the Pathēt Lao as the U.S. disengaged itself from Indochina. Prime Minister Souvanna Phouma was tired and demoralised, and following a heart attack in mid-1974 he spent some months recuperating in France, after which he announced that he would retire from politics following the elections scheduled for early 1976.

Hmong woman and child at Long Tieng, Laos military base in 1973.

The anti-communist forces were thus leaderless, and also divided and deeply mired in corruption. Souphanouvong, by contrast, was confident and a master political tactician, and had behind him the disciplined cadres of the communist party and the Pathēt Lao forces and the North Vietnamese army. The end of American aid also meant the mass demobilization of most of the non-Pathēt Lao military forces in the country. The Pathēt Lao on the other hand continued to be both funded and equipped by North Vietnam.

In May 1974 Souphanouvong put forward an 18-point plan for "National Reconstruction", which was unanimously adopted – a sign of his increasing dominance. The plan was mostly uncontroversial, with renewed promises of free elections, democratic rights and respect for religion, as well as constructive economic policies. But press censorship was introduced in the name of "national unity", making it more difficult for non-communist forces to organise politically in response to the creeping Pathēt Lao takeover. In January 1975 all public meetings and demonstrations were banned. Recognising the trend of events, influential business and political figures began to move their assets, and in some cases themselves, to Thailand, France or the U.S.

Taking of Vientiane

In March 1975 the North Vietnamese began their final military offensive in South Vietnam, which by the end of April carried them to victory with the fall of Saigon. Thirteen days earlier the Khmer Rouge army had captured Phnom Penh. The Pathēt Lao now knew that victory was within reach, and with the Vietnam War over the North Vietnamese authorised the seizure of power in Laos. Pathēt Lao forces on the Plain of Jars supported by North Vietnamese heavy artillery and other units began advancing westward.

In late April, the Pathēt Lao took the government outpost at Sala Phou Khoum crossroads which opened up Route 13 to a Pathēt Lao advance toward Muang Kassy. For the non-Pathēt Lao elements in the government, compromise seemed better than allowing what had happened in Cambodia and South Vietnam to happen in Laos. A surrender was thought to be better than a change of power by force.

Demonstrations broke out in Vientiane, denouncing the rightists and demanding political change. Rightist ministers resigned from the government and fled the country, followed by senior Royal Lao Army commanders. A Pathēt Lao minister took over the defence portfolio, removing any chance of the Army resisting the Pathēt Lao takeover. Prime Minister Souvanna Phouma, dreading further conflict and apparently trusting Souphanouvong's promises of a moderate policy, gave instructions that the Pathēt Lao were not to be resisted, and the U.S. began to withdraw its diplomatic personnel.

The Pathēt Lao army entered the major towns of southern Laos during May, and in early June occupied Luang Phrabāng. Panic broke out in Vientiane as most of the business class and many officials, officers and others who had collaborated with the U.S. scrambled to get their families and property across the Mekong to Thailand. Recognising that the cause was lost, Vang Pao led thousands of his Hmong fighters and their families into exile – eventually about a third of all the Lao Hmong left the country. Pathēt Lao forces captured Vientiane in August.

For a few months the Pathēt Lao appeared to honour their promises of moderation. The shell of the coalition government was preserved, there were no arrests or show-trials, and private property was respected. Diplomatic relations with the U.S. were maintained, despite an immediate cut-off of all U.S. aid. (Other western countries continued to offer aid, and Soviet and eastern European technicians began to arrive to replace the departed Americans.) But in December there was a sharp change in policy. A joint meeting of the government and the Consultative Council was held, at which Souphanouvong demanded immediate change. There was no resistance.

On 2 December when Vientiane fell to the Pathet Lao King Savang Vatthana agreed to abdicate, and Souvanna Phouma resigned. The Lao People's Democratic Republic was proclaimed, with Souphanouvong as President. Kaisôn Phomvihān emerged from the shadows to become Prime Minister and the real ruler of the country. No more was heard of elections or political freedoms: non-communist newspapers were closed, and a large-scale purge of the civil service, army and police was launched. Thousands were dispatched for "re-education" in remote parts of the country, where many died and many more were kept for up to ten years. The vast majority of the royal family of Laos, including the deposed king, were also sent to the "re-education camps" and eventually died due to hard labor during the totalitarian period of the 1980s. This prompted a renewed flight from the country. "About 90 percent" of Laos's "intellectuals, technicians, and officials" left Laos following the communist takeover. Many of the professional and intellectual class, who had initially been willing to work for the new regime, changed their minds and left – a much easier thing to do from Laos than from either Vietnam or Cambodia. In proportional terms, Laos experienced the largest refugee flight of the Indochina nations with 300,000 people out of a total population of 3 million crossing the border into Thailand.

Once in power, the Pathet Lao economically cut its ties to all its neighbors (including China) with the exception of the DRV and signed a treaty of friendship with Hanoi. The treaty allowed the Vietnamese to station soldiers within Laos and to place advisers throughout the government and economy. This is considered by most historians and journalists to be the end of the Second Indochina War.

Evacuation of the Hmong

A dramatic event during the takeover of Laos by the communists was the evacuation of Vang Pao and other Hmong leaders by air from Long Tieng. The end came for Vang Pao on 5 May 1975 when he was called before Souvanna Phouma, the Prime Minister of Laos, and ordered to cooperate with the communist Pathet Lao. Vang Pao took the general's stars off his collar, threw them on the desk of Souvanna Phouma, and stalked out of the room. Four days later the official Pathet Lao newspaper warned that the Hmong people would be exterminated "to the last root."

Jerry Daniels, Vang Pao's CIA case officer, was the only American remaining in Long Tieng and he began to plan an evacuation of the Hmong. However, he had only one airplane to evacuate the 3,500 Hmong leaders and families he judged to be at risk of execution by the Pathet Lao then advancing on Long Tieng. Brigadier General Heinie Aderholt in Bangkok helped to find additional planes and sent three pilots flying two C-46 and one C-130 transport aircraft to Long Tieng. The planes were "sheep-dipped" to remove any U.S. markings as the operation was carried out in secret. The pilots were American civilians: Les Strouse, Matt Hoff, and Al Rich.

With the three American planes, the evacuation began in earnest on 13 May with each transport aircraft making four flights each that day from Long Tieng to Udorn, Thailand and transporting more than 65 people per airplane on each trip – far more than the 35 maximum passengers dictated by safety conditions at mountain-ringed Long Tieng. Thousands of Hmong clustered around the airstrip at Long Tieng awaiting evacuation and the situation became increasingly ugly. On 14 May, Vang Pao and Jerry Daniels were evacuated secretly by helicopter to Thailand and the air evacuation came to an end. The next day the Pathet Lao marched into Long Tieng unopposed. Daniels accompanied Vang Pao to exile in Montana and then returned to Thailand to help the Hmong refugees there.

What nobody had anticipated was the tens of thousands of Hmong left behind in Long Tieng and Laos would follow Vang Pao and other Hmong leaders to Thailand. By the end of 1975 about 40,000 Hmong had succeeded to reaching Thailand, traveling on foot through the mountains and floating across the Mekong River. How many died or were killed in the attempt to escape Laos is not known, but the flight of Hmong and other Laotian highland peoples into Thailand would continue for many more years. They faced repression at home from the communist government as the price of their collaboration with the Americans. Most of the Hmong in Thailand would eventually be resettled in the United States and other countries. Between 1975 and 1982, 53,700 Hmong and other highland Laotian refugees were resettled in the United States and thousands more in other countries.

Aftermath

Laotians hired to assist U.S. troops assigned with the Joint POW/MIA Accounting Command sift then move tons of dirt on a mountain near Xépôn, Laos (July 2004)

Unexploded cluster sub-munition, probably a BLU-26 type. Plain of Jars, Laos. 2012

Due to the Vietnam War, the Laotian War has been almost forgotten by the majority of people around the world, even in the United States and Vietnam.

Twenty-two years following the end of the Laotian War, on 15 May 1997, the U.S. officially acknowledged its role in the Secret War. A memorial to honor American and Hmong contributions to U.S. air and ground combat efforts during the conflict was established by the Lao Veterans of America, the Center for Public Policy Analysis, in cooperation with the U.S. Congress and others. The Laos Memorial is located on the grounds of the Arlington National Cemetery between the John F. Kennedy Eternal Flame and the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier.

Plight of Hmong and other U.S.-allied veterans

Many former ethnic Hmong and Laotian veterans and their families, led by Colonel Wangyee Vang of the Lao Veterans of America Institute and Lao Veterans of America worked to establish a non-profit organization and advocate for honorary U.S. citizenship for the Secret Army veterans. In 2000, the Hmong Veterans' Naturalization Act of 2000 was passed by the Republican-controlled U.S. Congress and signed into law by President Bill Clinton.

Many of the Hmong people came down from the mountains and surrendered to the Lao government, while others found their way to refugee camps in Thailand. In 2008, however, a repatriation agreement between the Thai and Lao governments resulted in a mass forced deportation of the people in these camps, and reports of atrocities committed against them by the Lao military spurred activist groups to try and persuade the Thai government to keep granting asylum to the refugees, but to no avail.

In 2004, following several years of pressure from a coalition of U.S. human rights activists, the U.S. government reversed its policy of denying immigration to Hmong who had fled Laos in the 1990s for refugee camps in Thailand. In a major victory for the Hmong, the U.S. government recognized some 15,000 Hmong as political refugees and afforded them expedited U.S. immigration rights.

Unexploded bombs

The U.S. dropped 2,756,941 tons of ordnance on 113,716 Laotian sites in 230,516 sorties between 1965 and 1973 alone. By September 1969, the Plain of Jars was largely deserted. 

UXO on display at a museum in Vientiane

U.S. aircraft dropped more ordnance on Laos than on all countries during World War II, leaving Laos with about 78 million pieces of unexploded ordnance (UXO) by the end of the war. Casualties continue to mount from UXO dropped by the U.S. and Laotian Air Forces from 1964 to 1973. It has been reported that, between 1964 and 1973, areas controlled by the invading communist North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao were hit by an average of one B‑52 bomb-load every eight minutes, 24 hours a day. Xiangkhouang Province was the most heavily bombed province. Thirty percent of bombs failed to explode immediately. 

UXO remains dangerous to persons coming in contact, purposefully or accidentally, with bombs. Casualties in Laos from UXO are estimated at 12,000 since 1973. Thirty-three years after the last bomb was dropped and after decades of UXO clearance programs, 59 people were known to have been killed or injured by UXO in 2006. So abundant are the remnants of bombs on the Plain of Jars that the collection and sale of scrap metal from bombs has been a major industry since the Civil War. About 300 Laotians are killed or injured per year by UXO.

See also

Bomb Harvest

The Center for Public Policy Analysis

CIA activities in Laos

First Indochina War

Hmong Veterans' Naturalization Act of 2000

Conflict in Laos involving the Hmong

Lao Human Rights Council

Lao Veterans of America

Laos Memorial

Lee Lue

United League for Democracy in Laos

Vang Pao

Vang Sue

Weapons of the Laotian Civil War

1967 Opium War

General:

French Indochina

Hmong

Notes

^ "The rise of Communism". Archived from the original on 17 November 2010. Retrieved 22 March 2017.

^ "Global security - Pathet Lao Uprising". Archived from the original on 4 September 2017. Retrieved 22 March 2017.

^ "Hmong rebellion in Laos". Archived from the original on 14 January 2010. Retrieved 22 March 2017.

^ a b "Area Handbook Series- Laos - Glossary". Archived from the original on 7 March 2016. Retrieved 21 March 2017.

^ T. Lomperis, From People's War to People's Rule (1996)

^ "S&S": Small, Melvin & Joel David Singer, Resort to Arms: International and Civil Wars 1816–1980 (1982)

^ Obermeyer, Ziad; Murray, Christopher J. L.; Gakidou, Emmanuela (2008). "Fifty years of violent war deaths from Vietnam to Bosnia: analysis of data from the world health survey programme". BMJ. 336 (7659): 1482–6. doi:10.1136/bmj.a137. PMC 2440905. PMID 18566045. Archived from the original on 22 June 2019. Retrieved 28 November 2017. See Table 3.

^  Archived 26 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine

^ Uppsala Conflict Data Program (2 November 2011). "Laos". Uppsala University Department of Peace and Conflict Research. Archived from the original on 21 January 2012. Retrieved 11 November 2002. In October 1953, the Franco-Lao Treaty of Amity and Association transferred power....

^ "Brief Chronology, 1959–1963". Foreign Office Files: United States of America, Series Two: Vietnam, 1959–1975; Part 2: Laos, 1959–1963. Archived from the original on 13 January 2012. Retrieved 2 November 2011. October 22 Franco-Lao Treaty of Amity and Association

^ a b Courtois, Stephane; et al. (1997). The Black Book of Communism. Harvard University Press. p. 575. ISBN 978-0-674-07608-2.

^ Laos (Erster Guerillakrieg der Meo (Hmong)). Archived 9 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine Kriege-Archiv der Arbeitsgemeinschaft Kriegsursachenforschung, Institut für Politikwissenschaft, Universität Hamburg.

^ http://factsanddetails.com/southeast-asia/Laos/sub5_3a/entry-2943.html Archived 12 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 17 April 2018.

^ "Bombing Laos". Hartford-hwp.com. 9 October 1995. Archived from the original on 19 January 2018. Retrieved 3 January 2017.

^ Branfman, Fred (18 May 2001), "Wanted", Salon, archived from the original on 30 January 2011

^ Wiseman, Paul (11 December 2003). "30-year-old bombs still very deadly in Laos". USA Today. Archived from the original on 17 November 2010. Retrieved 7 May 2010.

^ a b c 

^ a b c d e f g War in Laos. p. 5.

^ a b c d e Shadow War: The CIA's Secret War in Laos. p. 2.

^ a b At War in the Shadow of Vietnam: U.S. Military Aid to the Royal Lao Government, 1955 – 1975. p. 7.

^ a b 

^ 

^ 

^ a b c 

^ a b 

^ a b 

^ Shadow War: The CIA's Secret War in Laos. pp. 3–4.

^ War in Laos. p. 4 & 5.

^ Shadow War: The CIA's Secret War in Laos. p. 3.

^ At War in the Shadow of Vietnam: U.S. Military Aid to the Royal Lao Government, 1955–1975. pp. 7, 142–143.

^ 

^ Kathryn Statler, Replacing France: The Origins of American Intervention in Vietnam (University Press of Kentucky, 2007) p. 197; At War in the Shadow of Vietnam: U.S. Military Aid to the Royal Lao Government, 1955–1975. p. 9.

^ Shadow War: The CIA's Secret War in Laos. p. 4.

^ a b c At War in the Shadow of Vietnam: U.S. Military Aid to the Royal Lao Government, 1955 – 1975. pp. 9–10.

^ War in Laos. p. 4.

^ "EAPLS – Raven FAC". Ravens.org. Archived from the original on 24 November 2017. Retrieved 3 January 2017.

^ At War in the Shadow of Vietnam: U.S. Military Aid to the Royal Lao Government, 1955 – 1975. p. 10.

^ War in Laos. pp. 4–5.

^ 

^ 

^ "Maps, Weather, and Airports for Ban Nameo, Laos". Fallingrain.com. Archived from the original on 4 September 2017. Retrieved 3 January 2017.

^ a b c At War in the Shadow of Vietnam: U.S. Military Aid to the Royal Lao Government 1955 – 1975. p. 18.

^ 

^ 

^ a b c 

^ a b c Stuart-Fox, Martin, A history of Laos Archived 21 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine, p. 103.

^ Martin, p. 104.

^ a b c Martin, p. 105.

^ a b c 

^ At War in the Shadow of Vietnam: U.S. Military Aid to the Royal Lao Government 1955 – 1975. pp. 19–22.

^ War in Laos. pp. 7, 13.

^ War in Laos. p. 7.

^ a b c 

^ Shadow War: The CIA's Secret War in Laos. pp. 32–33.

^ a b Jarred James Breaux. "NAKQUDA.com - - - Anthropology, Architecture, Art, Computer Science, Foreign Language, History, Humanities, Literature, Music, Philosophy, Politics, Psychology, Religion, Science, Sociology, Miscellaneous, Mathematics, Rocktry, & Theoretical Physics Essays". Archived from the original on 25 January 2009. Retrieved 3 January 2017.

^ At War in the Shadow of Vietnam: U.S. Military Aid to the Royal Lao Government 1955–1975. p. 20.

^ Shadow War: The CIA's Secret War in Laos. pp. 33–35, 40, 59.

^ Shadow War: The CIA's Secret War in Laos. pp. 33–35, 40, 59.

^ a b c d 

^ Shadow War: The CIA's Secret War in Laos. p. 39.

^ War in Laos. p. 10.

^ At War in the Shadow of Vietnam: U.S. Military Aid to the Royal Lao Government 1955 – 1975. pp. 21–25, 27.

^ 

^ Shadow War: The CIA's Shadow War in Laos. pp. 48–49.

^ Shadow War: The CIA's Shadow War in Laos. p. 50.

^ Shadow War: The CIA's Shadow War in Laos. pp. 47, 50–51.

^ At War in the Shadow of Vietnam. pp. 29–31.

^ a b War in Laos. p. 9.

^ At War in the Shadow of Vietnam. p. 31.

^ a b War in Laos. p. 13.

^ 

^ Spymaster. p. 158.

^ The Ravens: The Men Who Flew in America's Secret War in Laos. p. 134.

^ War in Laos. pp. 13, 15.

^ War in Laos. p. 16.

^ War in Laos. p. 17.

^ War in Laos. pp. 14–18.

^ a b c "Beginning Of Air Operations In Laos". Chancefac.net. Archived from the original on 21 February 2013. Retrieved 3 January 2017.

^ War in Laos. p. 18.

^ War in Laos. p. 18.

^ a b c War in Laos. p. 14.

^ a b 

^ Victory in Vietnam, p. 213.

^ "Debate Bombing Russian Ships at Haiphong". The Lewiston Daily Sun. 18 November 1965. Retrieved 15 May 2015.

^ a b Blond Ghost: Ted Shackley and the CIA's Crusaders. pp. 153–154.

^ a b Blond Ghost: Ted Shackley and the CIA's Crusaders. pp. 154–156.

^ Victory in Vietnam, p. 214.

^ Victory in Vietnam, p. 255.

^ Victory in Vietnam, p. 257.

^ a b Victory in Vietnam, p. 288.

^ Victory in Vietnam, p. 302.

^ "Glory of Laos: The Lao National Museum". Robolenin.com. 29 May 2014. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015. Retrieved 3 January 2017.

^ Hamilton-Merritt, Jane (1993). Tragic Mountains: The Hmong, the Americans, and the Secret Wars for Laos, 1942-1992. ISBN 978-0253207562.

^ Creak, Simon; Barney, Keith (2018). "Conceptualising Party-State Governance and Rule in Laos". Journal of Contemporary Asia. 48 (5): 693–716. doi:10.1080/00472336.2018.1494849.

^ Thompson, Larry Clinton, Refugee Workers in the Indochina Exodus, 1975–1982, Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland, 2010, 54

^ Thompson, 55–56

^ Thompson, 57–58; See also Morrison, Gayle, L. Sky is Falling: an Oral History of the CIA's evacuation of the Hmong from Laos, Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland, 1999

^ Thompson, 60–61

^ Thompson, 60

^ Thompson, 244

^ Acts of Betrayal: Persecution of Hmong", by Michael Johns, National Review, 23 October 1995". Archived from the original on 5 July 2007. Retrieved 1 September 2016.

^ "Hmong Immigration". Nvo.com. Archived from the original on 7 May 2016. Retrieved 3 January 2017.

^ Stone, Oliver and Kuznick, Peter, "The Untold History of the United States" (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2012), p. 389 citing Marilyn B. Young, The Vietnam Wars, 1945–1990 (New York: Harper Perennial, 1991), pp. 234–236; and Fred Branfman, Voices of the Plain of Jars: Life Under an Air War (New York: Harper & Row, 1972), pp. 3 and 18–20

^ Stone, Oliver and Kuznick, Peter, "The Untold History of the United States" (New York: Simon & Schuster, Inc., 2012), p. 389 citing "Marilyn B. Young, "The Vietnam Wars, 1945-1990" (New York: Harper Perennial, 1991), p. 234-236; and Fred Branfman, "Voices of the Plain of Jars: Life under an Air War" (New York: Harper & Row, 1972), pp. 3 and 18-20

^ a b Khamvongsa & Russell 2009, p. 282.

^ MacKinnon, Ian (3 December 2008). "Forty years on, Laos reaps bitter harvest of the secret war". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 5 September 2013. Retrieved 7 May 2010.

^ "James Madison University - CISR Home". Maic.jmu.edu. Retrieved 3 January 2017.

^ Thompson, p. 47

References

Government documents

Military History Institute of Vietnam, Victory in Vietnam: The Official History of the People's Army of Vietnam, 1954–1975. Trans. by Merle Pribbenow. Lawrence KS: University of Kansas Press, 2002.

Nalty, Bernard C. War Against Trucks: Aerial Interdiction in Southern Laos, 1968–1973. Washington, D.C.: Air Force Museums and History Program, 2005.

Van Staaveren, Jacob, Interdiction in Southern Laos, 1960–1968. Washington, D.C.: Center of Air Force History, 1993.

Vongsavanh, Brig. Gen. Soutchay, RLG Military Operations and Activities in the Laotian Panhandle. Washington, D.C.: United States Army Center of Military History, 1980.

Foreign Relations Series, 1961–1963, LAOS CRISIS

Histories

War in Laos, 1954–1975. Kenneth J. Conboy. Squadron/Signal Publications, 1994. ISBN 978-0-89747-315-6, ISBN 978-0-89747-315-6.

At War in the Shadow of Vietnam: United States Military Aid to the Royal Lao Government, 1955–1975. Timothy Castle. Columbia University Press, 1993. ISBN 978-0-231-07977-8, ISBN 978-0-231-07977-8.

Memoirs

Mervyn Brown, War in Shangri-La: A Memoir of Civil War in Laos

Henry Kissinger, White House Years.

Richard Nixon, RN: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon.

Kao Kalia Yang, The Latehomecomer

Secondary sources

Adams, Nina S. and Alfred W. McCoy, eds. Laos: War and Revolution. New York: Harper & Row, 1970.

Breaux, Jarred James, The Laotian Civil War: The Intransigence of General Phoumi Nosavan and American Intervention in the Fall of 1960. Morrisville, North Carolina: Lulu, 2008.

Blaufarb, Douglas, The Counterinsurgency Era.

Champassak, Sisouk Na, Storm Over Laos. New York: Praeger, 1961.

Conboy, Kenneth; Morrison, James (1995). Shadow War: The CIA's Secret War in Laos (Paper ed.). Boulder CO: Paladin Press. ISBN 978-1581605358. ASIN 1581605358.

Corn, David, Blond Ghost: Ted Shackley and the CIA's Crusades. Simon & Schuster, 1994. ISBN 978-0-671-69525-5, ISBN 978-0-671-69525-5

Duiker, William J., The Communist Road to Power in Vietnam 2nd ed. Westview Press, 1996.

Issacs, Arnold, Gordon Hardy, MacAlister Brown, et al., Pawns of War: Cambodia and Laos. Boston: Boston Publishing co, 1987.

Karnow, Stanley, Vietnam: A History. New York: Viking, 1983.

Khamvongsa, Channapha; Russell, Elaine (2009). "Legacies of War: Cluster Bombs in Laos" (PDF). Critical Asian Studies. 41 (2): 281–306. doi:10.1080/14672710902809401.

McCoy, Alfred W.; Read, Kathleen B. (1972), The Politics of Heroin in Southeast Asia, Harper & Row, ISBN 978-0060129019, archived from the original on 16 February 2015

McGehee, Ralph W. Deadly Deceits: My 25 Years in the CIA. New York: Sheridan Square, 1983.

Morrison, Gayle L. Sky is Falling: an Oral History of the CIA evacuation of the Hmong from Laos, Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland, 1999

Osornprasop, Sutayut (2012), "Thailand and the secret War in Laos, 1960–1974", in Lau, Albert (ed.), Southeast Asia and the Cold War (hardback)|format= requires |url= (help), Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon; New York: Routledge, ISBN 978-0-415-68450-7.

Robbins, Christopher (1985), Air America, New York: Avon.

——— (2000), The Ravens: Pilots of the Secret War in Laos, Bangkok: Asia Books.

Schanche, Don A. (1970), Mister Pop, New York: David McKay Company, OCLC 68288

Thompson, Larry Clinton (2010), Refugee Workers in the Indochina Exodus, 1975–1982, Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland & Co., ISBN 9780786445295.

Warner, Roger (1996), Shooting at the moon : the story of America' clandestine war in Laos, South Royalton, Vt.: Steerforth Press, ISBN 978-1883642365

Watry, David M. Diplomacy at the Brink: Eisenhower, Churchill, and Eden in the Cold War. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2014.

External links

Undercover Armies, CIA and Surrogate Warfare in Laos, from CIA's FOIA Reading Room

CIA Declassified Air America Collection

CIA Vietnam FOIA Collection. Documents declassified by CIA under FOIA.

"'Secret War' Still Killing Thousands", Andre Vltchek, Worldpress.org correspondent, 14 November 2006.

The Secret War in Laos, from the plainofjars.net Web Site.

"Acts of Betrayal" at Archive.today (archived 5 July 2007), by Michael Johns, National Review, New York City, 23 October 1995.

Air America Association web site

Online Archive Materials about Air America in the Vietnam Archive at Texas Tech

Air America by Christopher Robbins

The Ravens, Pilots of the Secret War in Laos by Christopher Robbins

Hmong In Transition by Sheila Pinkel

Bibliography: Laos (bibliography mainly devoted to the portions of the Second Indochina War that occurred in Laos)

v

t

e

Laos articles

History 
Peopling

Khun Borom

Lao people

Tai peoples

Lan Xang

Wat Phou

Luang Phrabang

Viang Chan

Champasak

Muang Phuan

French Laos

Japanese invasion

Lao Issara

Kingdom of Laos

Indochina Wars

Ho Chi Minh trail

Pathet Lao

Laotian Civil War

Vietnamese invasion

Neutrality

History until 1945

History since 1945

Insurgency

2007 coup attempt

Geography

Deforestation

Ecoregions

Mekong

Phou Bia

Rivers

Protected areas

Towns

Wildlife

World Heritage Sites

Politics

Administrative divisions

Constitution

Elections

Foreign relations

General Secretary

Human rights

Insurgencies

Law

Law enforcement

Military

National Assembly

Political parties

President

Prime Minister

Economy

Agriculture

Central bank

Kip (currency)

Energy

Fishing

Stock exchange

Telecommunications

Tourism

Trade unions

Transport

Society

Crime

Demographics

Education

Ethnic groups

Health

Language

Prostitution

Religion

Sex trafficking

Women

Culture 
Anthem

Cuisine

Dramatic arts

Emblem

Festivals

Flag

Literature

Music

Public holidays

Sports

Outline

Index

Category

Portal

v

t

e

Cold War

USA

USSR

NATO

ANZUS

SEATO

METO

Warsaw Pact

Non-Aligned Movement

Second Cold War

1940s 
Morgenthau Plan

Hukbalahap Rebellion

Jamaican political conflict

Dekemvriana

Percentages agreement

Yalta Conference

Guerrilla war in the Baltic states
Forest Brothers

Operation Priboi

Operation Jungle

Occupation of the Baltic states

Cursed soldiers

Operation Unthinkable

Operation Downfall

Potsdam Conference

Gouzenko Affair

Division of Korea

Operation Masterdom

Operation Beleaguer

Operation Blacklist Forty

Iran crisis of 1946

Greek Civil War

Baruch Plan

Corfu Channel incident

Turkish Straits crisis

Restatement of Policy on Germany

First Indochina War

Truman Doctrine

Asian Relations Conference

May 1947 crises

Marshall Plan

Comecon

1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état

Al-Wathbah uprising

1947–1949 Palestine war
1947–1948 Civil War in Mandatory Palestine

1948 Arab–Israeli War

1948 Palestinian exodus

Tito–Stalin split

Berlin Blockade

Western betrayal

Iron Curtain

Eastern Bloc

Western Bloc

Chinese Civil War

Malayan Emergency

March 1949 Syrian coup d'état

Albanian Subversion

1950s 
Bamboo Curtain

Korean War

McCarthyism

Mau Mau Uprising

Algerian War

Egyptian revolution of 1952

1953 Iranian coup d'état

East German uprising of 1953

Pact of Madrid

Bricker Amendment

1954 Guatemalan coup d'état

1954 Geneva Conference

Jebel Akhdar War

Vietnam War

First Taiwan Strait Crisis

Cyprus Emergency

Geneva Summit (1955)

Bandung Conference

Poznań protests of 1956

Hungarian Revolution of 1956

Suez Crisis

"We will bury you"

Ifni War

Operation Gladio

Arab Cold War
Syrian Crisis of 1957

1958 Lebanon crisis

Iraqi 14 July Revolution

Sputnik crisis

Second Taiwan Strait Crisis

1959 Tibetan uprising

1959 Mosul uprising

Cuban Revolution
Aftermath of the Cuban Revolution

Kitchen Debate

Sino-Soviet split

1960s 
Congo Crisis

Simba rebellion

1960 U-2 incident

Bay of Pigs Invasion

1960 Turkish coup d'état

Soviet–Albanian split

Iraqi–Kurdish conflict
First Iraqi–Kurdish War

Berlin Crisis of 1961

Berlin Wall

Papua conflict

Sand War

Portuguese Colonial War
Angolan War of Independence

Guinea-Bissau War of Independence

Mozambican War of Independence

Cuban Missile Crisis

El Porteñazo

Sino-Indian War

Communist insurgency in Sarawak

Ramadan Revolution

Eritrean War of Independence

North Yemen Civil War

1963 Syrian coup d'état

Assassination of John F. Kennedy

Aden Emergency

Cyprus crisis of 1963–64

Vietnam War

Shifta War

Mexican Dirty War
Tlatelolco massacre

Guatemalan Civil War

Colombian conflict

1964 Brazilian coup d'état

Dominican Civil War

Rhodesian Bush War

South African Border War

Transition to the New Order (Indonesia)

Domino theory

ASEAN Declaration

Laotian Civil War

1966 Syrian coup d'état

Argentine Revolution

Korean DMZ Conflict

Greek military junta of 1967–1974

Years of Lead (Italy)

USS Pueblo incident

Six-Day War

War of Attrition

Dhofar Rebellion

Al-Wadiah War

Nigerian Civil War

Protests of 1968
May 68

Cultural Revolution

Prague Spring

1968 Polish political crisis

Communist insurgency in Malaysia

Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia

17 July Revolution

1969 Libyan coup d'état

Football War

Goulash Communism

Sino-Soviet border conflict

CPP–NPA–NDF rebellion

Corrective Move

1970s 
Détente

Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty

Black September

Alcora Exercise

Corrective Movement (Syria)

Western Sahara conflict

Cambodian Civil War

Vietnam War

Koza riot

Realpolitik

Ping-pong diplomacy

Corrective Revolution (Egypt)

1971 Turkish military memorandum

1971 Sudanese coup d'état

Four Power Agreement on Berlin

Bangladesh Liberation War

1972 Nixon visit to China

North Yemen-South Yemen Border conflict of 1972

Yemenite War of 1972

Communist insurgency in Bangladesh

Eritrean Civil Wars

1973 Uruguayan coup d'état

1973 Afghan coup d'état

1973 Chilean coup d'état

Yom Kippur War

1973 oil crisis

Carnation Revolution

Spanish transition to democracy

Metapolitefsi

Strategic Arms Limitation Talks

Second Iraqi–Kurdish War

Turkish invasion of Cyprus

Angolan Civil War

Mozambican Civil War

Oromo conflict

Ogaden War

1978 Somali coup d'état attempt

Western Sahara War

Ethiopian Civil War

Lebanese Civil War

Sino-Albanian split

Cambodian–Vietnamese War

Operation Condor

Dirty War (Argentina)

1976 Argentine coup d'état

Libyan–Egyptian War

German Autumn

Korean Air Lines Flight 902

Nicaraguan Revolution

Uganda–Tanzania War

NDF Rebellion

Chadian–Libyan conflict

Yemenite War of 1979

Grand Mosque seizure

Iranian Revolution

Saur Revolution

Sino-Vietnamese War

New Jewel Movement

1979 Herat uprising

Seven Days to the River Rhine

Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union

1980s 
Salvadoran Civil War

Soviet–Afghan War

1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts

Peruvian conflict

Eritrean Civil Wars

1980 Turkish coup d'état

Ugandan Bush War

Gulf of Sidra incident

Casamance conflict

Falklands War

1982 Ethiopian–Somali Border War

Ndogboyosoi War

United States invasion of Grenada

Able Archer 83

Star Wars

Iran–Iraq War

Somali Rebellion

1986 Black Sea incident

South Yemen Civil War

Toyota War

Lord's Resistance Army insurgency

1988 Black Sea bumping incident

Bougainville Civil War

8888 Uprising

Solidarity
Soviet reaction

Contras

Central American crisis

RYAN

Korean Air Lines Flight 007

People Power Revolution

Glasnost

Perestroika

Nagorno-Karabakh War

Afghan Civil War

United States invasion of Panama

1988 Polish strikes

1989 Tiananmen Square protests

Revolutions of 1989

Fall of the Berlin Wall

Fall of the inner German border

Velvet Revolution

Romanian Revolution

Peaceful Revolution

1990s 
Mongolian Revolution of 1990

Gulf War

German reunification

Yemeni unification

Fall of communism in Albania

Breakup of Yugoslavia

Dissolution of Czechoslovakia

Dissolution of the Soviet Union
1991 August Coup

Frozen conflicts 
Abkhazia

China-Taiwan

Korea

Puerto Rico

Kosovo

Nagorno-Karabakh

South Ossetia

Transnistria

Sino-Indian border dispute

North Borneo dispute

Foreign policy 
Truman Doctrine

Containment

Eisenhower Doctrine

Domino theory

Hallstein Doctrine

Kennedy Doctrine

Peaceful coexistence

Ostpolitik

Johnson Doctrine

Brezhnev Doctrine

Nixon Doctrine

Ulbricht Doctrine

Carter Doctrine

Reagan Doctrine

Rollback

Sovereignty of Puerto Rico during the Cold War

Ideologies

Capitalism 
Liberalism

Chicago school

Keynesianism

Libertarianism

Monetarism

Neoclassical economics

Reaganomics

Supply-side economics

Thatcherism

Socialism 
Communism

Marxism–Leninism

Castroism

Eurocommunism

Guevarism

Hoxhaism

Juche

Maoism

Trotskyism

Naxalism

Stalinism

Titoism

Other 
Imperialism

Anti-imperialism

Nationalism

Ultranationalism

Chauvinism

Ethnic nationalism

Racism

Zionism

Fascism

Neo-Nazism

Islamism

Totalitarianism

Authoritarianism

Autocracy

Liberal democracy

Illiberal democracy

Guided democracy

Social democracy

Third-Worldism

White supremacy

White nationalism

White separatism

Apartheid

Organizations 
NATO

SEATO

METO

EEC

Warsaw Pact

Comecon

Non-Aligned Movement

ASEAN

SAARC

CIA

MI6

KGB

Stasi

Safari Club

Propaganda 
Active measures

 Amerika

Crusade for Freedom

Izvestia

Pravda

Voice of America

Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty

Radio Free Asia

Red Scare

Soviet Life

TASS

Races 
Arms race

Nuclear arms race

Space Race

Historians 
Gar Alperovitz

Thomas A. Bailey

Michael Beschloss

Archie Brown

Warren H. Carroll

Adrian Cioroianu

John Costello

Michael Cox

Nicholas J. Cull

Willem Drees

Robert D. English

Herbert Feis

Robert Hugh Ferrell

André Fontaine

Anneli Ute Gabanyi

John Lewis Gaddis

Lloyd Gardner

Timothy Garton Ash

Gabriel Gorodetsky

Fred Halliday

Jussi Hanhimäki

John Earl Haynes

Patrick J. Hearden

Tvrtko Jakovina

Tony Judt

Harvey Klehr

Gabriel Kolko

Walter LaFeber

Walter Laqueur

Melvyn Leffler

Geir Lundestad

Mary Elise Sarotte

Vojtech Mastny

Jack F. Matlock Jr.

Thomas J. McCormick

Timothy Naftali

Marius Oprea

David S. Painter

William B. Pickett

Ronald E. Powaski

Yakov M. Rabkin

Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.

Ellen Schrecker

Giles Scott-Smith

Shen Zhihua

Athan Theoharis

Andrew Thorpe

Vladimir Tismăneanu

Patrick Vaughan

Alex von Tunzelmann

Odd Arne Westad

William Appleman Williams

Jonathan Reed Winkler

Rudolph Winnacker

Ken Young

See also 
Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War

List of Eastern Bloc agents in the United States

Soviet espionage in the United States

Soviet Union–United States relations

USSR–USA summits

Russian espionage in the United States

American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation

Russia–NATO relations

Brinkmanship

CIA and the Cultural Cold War

Second Cold War

Russian Revolution

Category

Commons

Timeline

List of conflicts

v

t

e

Wars of the 20th century

1900s 
Thousand Days' War

Second Boer War

War of the Golden Stool

Shoubak revolt of 1900

Russian invasion of Manchuria

Sharjah conquest of Ras Al Khaimah

Somaliland Campaign

Kuwaiti–Rashidi war

Revolución Libertadora 

Anglo-Aro War

Battle of Holy Apostles Monastery

1901 Mapondera Rebellion

Holy Man's Rebellion

Kuanhama Rebellion of 1902-1904

Bailundo Revolt of 1902

Venezuelan crisis of 1902–03

Battle of Jo-Laban

Theriso revolt

May Coup (Serbia)

Ilinden–Preobrazhenie Uprising

British expedition to Tibet

British conquest of the Sokoto Caliphate

Saudi–Rashidi War

South West African Revolt of 1904-1906

Portuguese campaign against the Ovambo

Vaccine Revolt

Revolution of 1904

1904 Sasun uprising

Herero Wars

Russo-Japanese War

Yemeni Rebellion of 1904

Macedonian Struggle

Argentine Revolution of 1905

Shoubak Revolt of 1905

Łódź insurrection (1905)

1905 Tibetan Rebellion

1905 Russian Revolution

Maji Maji Rebellion

Yemeni Expedition of 1905

Sokoto Uprising of 1906

1906 Mesopotamia uprising

Dutch intervention in Bali (1906)

Bambatha Rebellion

Dembos War of 1907-1910

Anti-Foreign Revolt

Mutair revolt

1907 Romanian Peasants' Revolt

Honduran-Nicaraguan War

Beipu uprising

Buraida rebellion

Dersim insurgencies

Battle of Marrakech

Mau uprising 

Young Turk Revolution

Dutch intervention in Bali (1908)

Dutch–Venezuelan crisis of 1908

Estrada's rebellion

Kolašin Affair (1909)

Zaraniq rebellion

Crazy Snake Rebellion

Second Melillan campaign

Hauran Druze Rebellion

Ouaddai War

1910s 
Battle of Hadia 

Karak Revolt

Albanian Revolt of 1910

5 October 1910 revolution

Chinese expedition to Tibet (1910)

Sokehs Rebellion

Mexican Revolution

Border War (1910–19)

Bandit War

Magonista rebellion of 1911

1911 Paraguayan Civil War

Russian Invasion of Tabriz

Albanian Revolt of 1911

Second Guangzhou Uprising

Dominican Civil War (1911–12)

French conquest of Morocco

Italo-Turkish War

East Timorese Rebellion

1911 Revolution

War of the Generals

Sirte revolt

Khost rebellion (1912)

First Balkan War

Albanian Revolt of 1912

Contestado War

United States occupation of Nicaragua

Royalist attack on Chaves

Negro Rebellion

Urtatagai conflict (1913)

Atmene uprising 

Conquest of al-Hasa

Second Balkan War

Tikveš Uprising

Ohrid–Debar Uprising

Second Revolution (Republic of China)

Bai Lang Rebellion

Operations in the Tochi

Revolt of Juazeiro 

Zaian War

Dominican Civil War of 1914

Peasant Revolt in Albania

Truku War

World War I

United States occupation of Veracruz

Bluff War

Ovambo insurrection in Portuguese Angola 

Maritz Rebellion

Tapani incident

Battle of Kinzaan

Battle of Jarrab

Chilembwe uprising

Bussa rebellion

1915 Singapore Mutiny

Volta-Bani War

National Protection War

Senussi Campaign

United States occupation of Haiti

Operations against the Mohmands, Bunerwals and Swatis in 1915

Mohmand blockade

Cuban Civil War

Kaocen Revolt

1916 Cochinchina uprising

Battle of Segale

Noemvriana

Central Asian revolt of 1916

Easter Rising

United States occupation of the Dominican Republic (1916–24)

Arab Revolt

Basmachi movement

February Revolution

July Days

Manchu Restoration

Thái Nguyên uprising

Polubotkivtsi Uprising

Toplica insurrection

Kornilov Affair

Green Corn Rebellion

October Revolution

Kerensky–Krasnov uprising

Russian Civil War

Constitutional Protection Movement

Ukrainian War of Independence

Ngolok rebellions (1917–49)

Operations against the Marri and Khetran tribes (1918)

Adubi War

Simko Shikak revolt (1918–22)

Judenburg mutiny

Cattaro Mutiny

Aster Revolution

Radomir Rebellion

Left SR uprising

Finnish Civil War

Georgian–Armenian War

Polish–Czechoslovak border conflicts

Viena expedition

First Pechenga expedition

Austro-Slovene conflict in Carinthia

German Revolution of 1918–19

Greater Poland Uprising (1918–19)

Hungarian–Czechoslovak War

Polish–Ukrainian War

Georgian–Ossetian conflict (1918–20)

Sochi conflict

Armenian–Azerbaijani War

Estonian War of Independence

Latvian War of Independence

Lithuanian–Soviet War

Al-Khurma dispute

War of the Insane

Revolt of the Ingrian Finns

Franco-Turkish War

Punjab Rebellion

Black Sea mutinies 

1919 Royalist uprising in Northern Portugal

Christmas Uprising

Spartacist uprising

Lithuanian War of Independence (War against the Bermontians)

Sejny Uprising

First Barzanji Revolt

Polish–Czechoslovak War

Khotin Uprising

Hungarian–Romanian war of 1919

Turkish War of Independence

Third Anglo-Afghan War

Waziristan campaign (1919–1920)

Impresa di Fiume

Italo-Yugoslav War

First Honduran Civil War 

Polish–Soviet War

First Silesian Uprising

Aunus expedition

Alawite Revolt of 1919

Irish War of Independence

Kuwait–Najd War

Greco-Turkish War (1919–1922)

Revolts during the Turkish War of Independence

1920s 
Zhili–Anhui War

Franco-Turkish War

Red Army invasion of Georgia

East Karelian uprising and Soviet–Finnish conflict of 1921–22

First Zhili–Fengtian War

Second Zhili–Fengtian War

Rif War

Irish Civil War

Paraguayan Civil War (1922)

Cristero War

Afghan Civil War (1928–1929)

1930s 
Sino-Tibetan War

Japanese invasion of Manchuria

Chaco War

Leticia Incident

Saudi–Yemeni War (1934)

Austrian Civil War

Second Italo-Ethiopian War

Spanish Civil War

Second Sino-Japanese War

Battle of Lake Khasan

Polish–Czechoslovak War

Slovak–Hungarian War

Battles of Khalkhin Gol

World War II

Soviet invasion of Poland

Winter War

Italian invasion of Albania

1940s 
Greco-Italian War

Franco-Thai War

German–Soviet War

Continuation War

Anglo-Iraqi War

Lapland War

Soviet–Japanese War

Ecuadorian–Peruvian War

Indonesian National Revolution

First Indochina War

Greek Civil War

Paraguayan Civil War (1947)

Chinese Civil War

Costa Rican Civil War

Indo-Pakistani War of 1947–1948

La Violencia

1948 Arab–Israeli War

Malayan Emergency

1950s 
Korean War

Algerian War

First Sudanese Civil War

Laotian Civil War

Suez Crisis

Hungarian Revolution of 1956

Cuban Revolution

Ifni War

Vietnam War

1958 Lebanon crisis

1960s 
Guatemalan Civil War

Congo Crisis

Bay of Pigs Invasion

Bizerte crisis

Annexation of Goa

Angolan War of Independence

Eritrean War of Independence

Sino-Indian War

Dhofar Rebellion

Guinea-Bissau War of Independence

Sand War

Colombian conflict

Mozambican War of Independence

Indo-Pakistani War of 1965

Dominican Civil War

South African Border War

Rhodesian Bush War

1967 Opium War

Chadian Civil War (1965–79)

Six-Day War

Nigerian Civil War

Cambodian Civil War

Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia

Football War

Sino-Soviet border conflict

Tielieketi

1970s 
Black September

Bangladesh Liberation War

Indo-Pakistani War of 1971

Yom Kippur War

Western Sahara War

Turkish invasion of Cyprus

Ethiopian Civil War

Cod Wars

Cambodian–Vietnamese War

Lebanese Civil War

Angolan Civil War

Mozambican Civil War

Indonesian occupation of East Timor

Libyan–Egyptian War

Ogaden War

1978 South Lebanon conflict

Opération Lamantin

Uganda–Tanzania War

Chadian–Libyan conflict

Sino-Vietnamese War

Soviet–Afghan War

Salvadoran Civil War

1980s 
Iran–Iraq War

Paquisha War

Falklands War

1982 Lebanon War

United States invasion of Grenada

Second Sudanese Civil War

Sri Lankan Civil War

Operation Blue Star

Kurdish–Turkish conflict (1978–present)

Agacher Strip War

Somali Civil War

United States invasion of Panama

First Liberian Civil War

Afghan Civil War (1989–1992)

1990s 
1991–1992 South Ossetia War

Rwandan Civil War

Georgian Civil War

Djiboutian Civil War

Invasion of Kuwait

Gulf War

Yugoslav Wars
Slovenian Independence War

Croatian War of Independence

Bosnian War

Nagorno-Karabakh War

Algerian Civil War

Sierra Leone Civil War

Afghan Civil War (1992–1996)

Transnistria War

Abkhaz–Georgian conflict
War in Abkhazia (1992–1993)

War in Abkhazia (1998)

Tajikistani Civil War

Burundian Civil War

Yemeni Civil War (1994)

First Chechen War

Iraqi Kurdish Civil War

Cenepa War

First Congo War

Nepalese Civil War

Republic of the Congo Civil War (1997–99)

Kosovo War

NATO bombing of Yugoslavia

Guinea-Bissau Civil War

Second Congo War

Eritrean–Ethiopian War

War of Dagestan

Kargil War

Second Chechen War

Second Liberian Civil War

Lists of wars of the 20th century
1900–1944

1945–1989

1990–2002
