"Study of human language

This article is about the field of study. For the journal, see Linguistics (journal).

"Linguist" redirects here. For other uses, see Linguist (disambiguation).

This article's lead section does not adequately summarize key points of its contents. Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article. Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page. (December 2019)

 Part of a series on

Linguistics

Outline

History

Index

Subfields

Acquisition

Anthropological

Applied

Computational

Discourse analysis

Forensic

Historical

Lexicography

Morphology

Morphophonology

Neurolinguistics

Philosophy of language

Phonetics

Phonology

Pragmatics

Psycholinguistics

Semantics

Sociolinguistics

Syntax

Grammatical theories

Cognitive

Model-theoretic

Constituency

Dependency

Functional

Generative

Stochastic

Topics

Conservative / innovative forms

Descriptivism

Etymology

Internet linguistics

LGBT linguistics

Linguistic anthropology

Linguistic philosophy

Origin of language

Origin of speech

Orthography

Prescriptivism

Second-language acquisition

Structuralism

 Portal

v

t

e

Linguistics is the scientific study of language. It involves the analysis of language form, language meaning, and language in context. Linguists traditionally analyse human language by observing an interplay between sound and meaning. Linguistics also deals with the social, cultural, historical, and political factors that influence language, through which linguistic and language-based context is often determined. Research on language through the sub-branches of historical and evolutionary linguistics also focuses on how languages change and grow, particularly over an extended period of time.

The earliest activities in the documentation and description of language have been attributed to the 6th-century-BC Indian grammarian Pāṇini who wrote a formal description of the Sanskrit language in his Aṣṭādhyāyī.

Related areas of study include the disciplines of semiotics (the study of direct and indirect language through signs and symbols), literary criticism (the historical and ideological analysis of literature, cinema, art, or published material), translation (the conversion and documentation of meaning in written/spoken text from one language or dialect onto another), and speech-language pathology (a corrective method to cure phonetic disabilities and dis-functions at the cognitive level).

Contents

1 Major subdisciplines

1.1 Historical linguistics

1.2 Syntax and morphology

1.3 Semantics and pragmatics

1.4 Phonetics and phonology

2 Language varieties

2.1 Contact varieties

2.2 Dialect

2.3 Standard language

2.4 Relativity

3 Structures

3.1 Grammar

3.2 Discourse

3.3 Lexicon

3.4 Style

4 Approaches

4.1 Humanistic

4.2 Biological

5 Methodology

5.1 Anthropology

5.2 Sources

5.3 Analysis

6 History

6.1 Nomenclature

6.2 Early grammarians

6.3 Comparative philology

6.4 20th century developments

7 Areas of research

7.1 Ecolinguistics

7.2 Sociolinguistics

7.3 Developmental linguistics

7.4 Neurolinguistics

7.5 Applied linguistics

7.6 Semiotics

7.7 Language documentation

7.8 Translation

7.9 Clinical linguistics

7.10 Computational linguistics

7.11 Evolutionary linguistics

7.12 Forensic linguistics

8 See also

9 References

10 Bibliography

11 External links

Major subdisciplines

 This section needs expansion. You can help by adding to it. (February 2020)

Historical linguistics

Main article: Historical linguistics

Although it may not seem obvious at first, the first name John shares a common origin with Shaun, Eoin, Ian, Juan, Ivan, and Yahya. More surprisingly, the Catalan words Joan ‹John› and xoni ‹Vulgar girl› are also related. They are all come from the Biblical Hebrew phrase God is gracious, over 30 centuries of evolution. Historical linguistics tries to analyze such changes and their links, and even recreate disappeared forms through comparing those that are known.

Historical linguistics is the study of language change over time particularly with regards to a specific language or group of languages. Historical linguistics was among the first sub-disciplines to emerge in linguistics, and was the most widely practised form of linguistics in the late 19th century. There was a shift of focus in the early twentieth century to the synchronic approach (the systemic study of the current stage in languages), but historical research remained a field of linguistic inquiry. Subfields include language change and grammaticalisation studies.

Western modern historical linguistics dates from the late 18th century. It grew out of the earlier discipline of philology, the study of ancient texts and documents dating back to antiquity.

At first, historical linguistics served as the cornerstone of comparative linguistics primarily as a tool for linguistic reconstruction. Scholars were concerned chiefly with establishing language families and reconstructing prehistoric proto-languages, using the comparative method and internal reconstruction. The focus was initially on the well-known Indo-European languages, many of which had long written histories; the scholars also studied the Uralic languages, another European language family for which less early written material exists. Since then, there has been significant comparative linguistic work expanding outside of European languages as well, such as on the Austronesian languages and various families of Native American languages, among many others. Comparative linguistics is now, however, only a part of a more broadly conceived discipline of historical linguistics. For the Indo-European languages, comparative study is now a highly specialized field. Most research is being carried out on the subsequent development of these languages, in particular, the development of the modern standard varieties.

Some scholars have undertaken studies attempting to establish super-families, linking, for example, Indo-European, Uralic, and other families into Nostratic. These attempts have not been accepted widely. The information necessary to establish relatedness becomes less available as the time depth is increased. The time-depth of linguistic methods is limited due to chance word resemblances and variations between language groups, but a limit of around 10,000 years is often assumed. The dating of the various proto-languages is also difficult; several methods are available for dating, but only approximate results can be obtained.

Syntax and morphology

Main articles: Syntax and Morphology (linguistics)

Syntax and morphology are branches of linguistics concerned with the order and structure of meaningful linguistic units such as words and morphemes. Syntacticians study the rules and constraints that govern how speakers of a language can organize words into sentences. Morphologists study similar rules for the order of morphemes—sub-word units such as prefixes and suffixes—and how they may be combined to form words.

While words, along with clitics, are generally accepted as being the smallest units of syntax, in most languages, if not all, many words can be related to other words by rules that collectively describe the grammar for that language. For example, English speakers recognize that the words dog and dogs are closely related, differentiated only by the plurality morpheme "-s", only found bound to noun phrases. Speakers of English, a fusional language, recognize these relations from their innate knowledge of English's rules of word formation. They infer intuitively that dog is to dogs as cat is to cats; and, in similar fashion, dog is to dog catcher as dish is to dishwasher. By contrast, Classical Chinese has very little morphology, using almost exclusively unbound morphemes ("free" morphemes) and depending on word order to convey meaning. (Most words in modern Standard Chinese , however, are compounds and most roots are bound.) These are understood as grammars that represent the morphology of the language. The rules understood by a speaker reflect specific patterns or regularities in the way words are formed from smaller units in the language they are using, and how those smaller units interact in speech. In this way, morphology is the branch of linguistics that studies patterns of word formation within and across languages and attempts to formulate rules that model the knowledge of the speakers of those languages.

Phonological and orthographic modifications between a base word and its origin may be partial to literacy skills. Studies have indicated that the presence of modification in phonology and orthography makes morphologically complex words harder to understand and that the absence of modification between a base word and its origin makes morphologically complex words easier to understand. Morphologically complex words are easier to comprehend when they include a base word.

Polysynthetic languages, such as Chukchi, have words composed of many morphemes. The Chukchi word "təmeyŋəlevtpəγtərkən", for example, meaning "I have a fierce headache", is composed of eight morphemes t-ə-meyŋ-ə-levt-pəγt-ə-rkən that may be glossed. The morphology of such languages allows for each consonant and vowel to be understood as morphemes, while the grammar of the language indicates the usage and understanding of each morpheme.

The discipline that deals specifically with the sound changes occurring within morphemes is morphophonology.

Semantics and pragmatics

Main articles: Semantics and Pragmatics

Semantics and pragmatics are branches of linguistics concerned with meaning. These subfields have traditionally been divided by the role of linguistic and social context in the determination of meaning. Semantics in this conception is concerned with core meanings and pragmatics concerned with meaning in context. Pragmatics encompasses speech act theory, conversational implicature, talk in interaction and other approaches to language behavior in philosophy, sociology, linguistics and anthropology. Unlike semantics, which examines meaning that is conventional or "coded" in a given language, pragmatics studies how the transmission of meaning depends not only on structural and linguistic knowledge (grammar, lexicon, etc.) of the speaker and listener but also on the context of the utterance, any pre-existing knowledge about those involved, the inferred intent of the speaker, and other factors. In that respect, pragmatics explains how language users are able to overcome apparent ambiguity since meaning relies on the manner, place, time, etc. of an utterance.

Phonetics and phonology

Main articles: Phonetics and Phonology

Phonetics and phonology are branches of linguistics concerned with sounds (or the equivalent aspects of sign languages). Phonetics is largely concerned with the physical aspects of sounds such as their acoustics, production, and perception. Phonology is concerned with the linguistic abstractions and categorizations of sounds.

Language varieties

Further information: Variety (linguistics)

Languages exist on a wide continuum of conventionalization with blurry divisions between concepts such as dialects and languages. Languages can undergo internal changes which lead to the development of subvarieties such as linguistic registers, accents, and dialects. Similarly, languages can undergo changes caused by contact with speakers of other languages, and new language varieties may be born from these contact situations through the process of language genesis.

Contact varieties

Further information: Creolistics

Contact varieties such as pidgins and creoles are language varieties that often arise in situations of sustained contact between communities that speak different languages. Pidgins are language varieties with limited conventionalization where ideas are conveyed through simplified grammars that may grow more complex as linguistic contact continues. Creole languages are language varieties similar to pidgins but with greater conventionalization and stability. As children grow up in contact situations, they may learn a local pidgin as their native language. Through this process of acquisition and transmission, new grammatical features and lexical items are created and introduced to fill gaps in the pidgin eventually developing into a complete language.

Not all language contact situations result in the development of a pidgin or creole, and researchers have studied the features of contact situations that make contact varieties more likely to develop. Often these varieties arise in situations of colonization and enslavement, where power imbalances prevent the contact groups from learning the other's language but sustained contact is nevertheless maintained. The subjugated language in the power relationship is the substrate language, while the dominant language serves as the superstrate. Often the words and lexicon of a contact variety come from the superstrate, making it the lexifier, while grammatical structures come from the substrate, but this is not always the case.

Dialect

A dialect is a variety of language that is characteristic of a particular group among the language's speakers. The group of people who are the speakers of a dialect are usually bound to each other by social identity. This is what differentiates a dialect from a register or a discourse, where in the latter case, cultural identity does not always play a role. Dialects are speech varieties that have their own grammatical and phonological rules, linguistic features, and stylistic aspects, but have not been given an official status as a language. Dialects often move on to gain the status of a language due to political and social reasons. Other times, dialects remain marginalized, particularly when they are associated with marginalized social groups. Differentiation amongst dialects (and subsequently, languages) is based upon the use of grammatical rules, syntactic rules, and stylistic features, though not always on lexical use or vocabulary. The popular saying that "a language is a dialect with an army and navy" is attributed as a definition formulated by Max Weinreich.

"We may as individuals be rather fond of our own dialect. This should not make us think, though, that it is actually any better than any other dialect. Dialects are not good or bad, nice or nasty, right or wrong – they are just different from one another, and it is the mark of a civilised society that it tolerates different dialects just as it tolerates different races, religions and sexes."

Standard language

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

When a dialect is documented sufficiently through the linguistic description of its grammar, which has emerged through the consensual laws from within its community, it gains political and national recognition through a country or region's policies. That is the stage when a language is considered a standard variety, one whose grammatical laws have now stabilised from within the consent of speech community participants, after sufficient evolution, improvisation, correction, and growth. The English language, besides perhaps the French language, may be examples of languages that have arrived at a stage where they are said to have become standard varieties.

Relativity

As constructed popularly through the Sapir–Whorf hypothesis, relativists believe that the structure of a particular language is capable of influencing the cognitive patterns through which a person shapes his or her world view. Universalists believe that there are commonalities between human perception as there is in the human capacity for language, while relativists believe that this varies from language to language and person to person. While the Sapir–Whorf hypothesis is an elaboration of this idea expressed through the writings of American linguists Edward Sapir and Benjamin Lee Whorf, it was Sapir's student Harry Hoijer who termed it thus. The 20th century German linguist Leo Weisgerber also wrote extensively about the theory of relativity. Relativists argue for the case of differentiation at the level of cognition and in semantic domains. The emergence of cognitive linguistics in the 1980s also revived an interest in linguistic relativity. Thinkers like George Lakoff have argued that language reflects different cultural metaphors, while the French philosopher of language Jacques Derrida's writings, especially about deconstruction, have been seen to be closely associated with the relativist movement in linguistics, for which he was heavily criticized in the media at the time of his death.

Structures

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Linguistic structures are pairings of meaning and form. Any particular pairing of meaning and form is a Saussurean sign. For instance, the meaning "cat" is represented worldwide with a wide variety of different sound patterns (in oral languages), movements of the hands and face (in sign languages), and written symbols (in written languages). Linguistic patterns have proven their importance for the knowledge engineering field especially with the ever-increasing amount of available data.

Linguists focusing on structure attempt to understand the rules regarding language use that native speakers know (not always consciously). All linguistic structures can be broken down into component parts that are combined according to (sub)conscious rules, over multiple levels of analysis. For instance, consider the structure of the word "tenth" on two different levels of analysis. On the level of internal word structure (known as morphology), the word "tenth" is made up of one linguistic form indicating a number and another form indicating ordinality. The rule governing the combination of these forms ensures that the ordinality marker "th" follows the number "ten." On the level of sound structure (known as phonology), structural analysis shows that the "n" sound in "tenth" is made differently from the "n" sound in "ten" spoken alone. Although most speakers of English are consciously aware of the rules governing internal structure of the word pieces of "tenth", they are less often aware of the rule governing its sound structure. Linguists focused on structure find and analyze rules such as these, which govern how native speakers use language.

Grammar

Grammar is a system of rules which governs the production and use of utterances in a given language. These rules apply to sound as well as meaning, and include componential subsets of rules, such as those pertaining to phonology (the organisation of phonetic sound systems), morphology (the formation and composition of words), and syntax (the formation and composition of phrases and sentences). Modern frameworks that deal with the principles of grammar include structural and functional linguistics, and generative linguistics.

Sub-fields that focus on a grammatical study of language include the following.

Phonetics, the study of the physical properties of speech sound production and perception, and delves into their acoustic and articulatory properties

Phonology, the study of sounds as abstract elements in the speaker's mind that distinguish meaning (phonemes)

Morphology, the study of morphemes, or the internal structures of words and how they can be modified

Syntax, the study of how words combine to form grammatical phrases and sentences

Semantics, the study of the meaning of words (lexical semantics) and fixed word combinations (phraseology), and how these combine to form the meanings of sentences as well as manage and resolve ambiguity.

Pragmatics, the study of how utterances are used in communicative acts, and the role played by situational context and non-linguistic knowledge in the transmission of meaning 

Discourse analysis, the analysis of language use in texts (spoken, written, or signed)

Stylistics, the study of linguistic factors (rhetoric, diction, stress) that place a discourse in context

Semiotics, the study of signs and sign processes (semiosis), indication, designation, likeness, analogy, metaphor, symbolism, signification, and communication

Discourse

Discourse is language as social practice (Baynham, 1995) and is a multilayered concept. As a social practice, discourse embodies different ideologies through written and spoken texts. Discourse analysis can examine or expose these ideologies. Discourse influences genre, which is chosen in response to different situations and finally, at micro level, discourse influences language as text (spoken or written) at the phonological or lexico-grammatical level. Grammar and discourse are linked as parts of a system. A particular discourse becomes a language variety when it is used in this way for a particular purpose, and is referred to as a register. There may be certain lexical additions (new words) that are brought into play because of the expertise of the community of people within a certain domain of specialization. Registers and discourses therefore differentiate themselves through the use of vocabulary, and at times through the use of style too. People in the medical fraternity, for example, may use some medical terminology in their communication that is specialized to the field of medicine. This is often referred to as being part of the "medical discourse", and so on.

Lexicon

The lexicon is a catalogue of words and terms that are stored in a speaker's mind. The lexicon consists of words and bound morphemes, which are parts of words that can't stand alone, like affixes. In some analyses, compound words and certain classes of idiomatic expressions and other collocations are also considered to be part of the lexicon. Dictionaries represent attempts at listing, in alphabetical order, the lexicon of a given language; usually, however, bound morphemes are not included. Lexicography, closely linked with the domain of semantics, is the science of mapping the words into an encyclopedia or a dictionary. The creation and addition of new words (into the lexicon) is called coining or neologization, and the new words are called neologisms.

It is often believed that a speaker's capacity for language lies in the quantity of words stored in the lexicon. However, this is often considered a myth by linguists. The capacity for the use of language is considered by many linguists to lie primarily in the domain of grammar, and to be linked with competence, rather than with the growth of vocabulary. Even a very small lexicon is theoretically capable of producing an infinite number of sentences.

Style

Stylistics also involves the study of written, signed, or spoken discourse through varying speech communities, genres, and editorial or narrative formats in the mass media. It involves the study and interpretation of texts for aspects of their linguistic and tonal style. Stylistic analysis entails the analysis of description of particular dialects and registers used by speech communities. Stylistic features include rhetoric, diction, stress, satire, irony, dialogue, and other forms of phonetic variations. Stylistic analysis can also include the study of language in canonical works of literature, popular fiction, news, advertisements, and other forms of communication in popular culture as well. It is usually seen as a variation in communication that changes from speaker to speaker and community to community. In short, Stylistics is the interpretation of text.

In the 1960s, Jacques Derrida, for instance, further distinguished between speech and writing, by proposing that written language be studied as a linguistic medium of communication in itself. Palaeography is therefore the discipline that studies the evolution of written scripts (as signs and symbols) in language. The formal study of language also led to the growth of fields like psycholinguistics, which explores the representation and function of language in the mind; neurolinguistics, which studies language processing in the brain; biolinguistics, which studies the biology and evolution of language; and language acquisition, which investigates how children and adults acquire the knowledge of one or more languages.

Approaches

See also: Theory of language

Humanistic

The fundamental principle of humanistic linguistics is that language is an invention created by people. A semiotic tradition of linguistic research considers language a sign system which arises as from the interaction of meaning and form. The organisation of linguistic levels is considered computational. Linguistics is essentially seen as relating to social and cultural studies because different languages are shaped in social interaction by the speech community. Frameworks representing the humanistic view of language include structural linguistics, among others. 

Structural analysis means dissecting each linguistic level: phonetic, morphological, syntactic, and discourse, to the smallest units. These are collected into inventories (e.g. phoneme, morpheme, lexical classes, phrase types) to study their interconnectedness within a hierarchy of structures and layers. Functional analysis adds to structural analysis the assignment of semantic and other functional roles that each unit may have. For example, a noun phrase may function as the subject or object of the sentence; or the agent or patient. 

Functional linguistics, or functional grammar, is a branch of structural linguistics. In the humanistic reference, the terms structuralism and functionalism are related to their meaning in other human sciences. The difference between formal and functional structuralism lies in the way that the two approaches explain why languages have the properties they have. Functional explanation entails the idea that language is a tool for communication, or that communication is the primary function of language. Linguistic forms are consequently explained by an appeal to their functional value, or usefulness. Other structuralist approaches take the perspective that form follows from the inner mechanisms of the bilateral and multilayered language system.

Biological

Other linguistics frameworks take as their starting point the notion that language is a biological phenomenon in humans. Generative Grammar is the study of an innate linguistic structure. In contrast to structural linguistics, Generative Grammar rejects the notion that meaning or social interaction affects language. Instead, all human languages are based on a crystallised structure which may have been caused by a mutation exclusively in humans. The study of linguistics is considered as the study of this hypothesised structure. 

Cognitive Linguistics, in contrast, rejects the notion of innate grammar, and studies how the human brain creates linguistic constructions from event schemas, and the impact of cognitive constraints and biases on human language. Similarly to neuro-linguistic programming, language is approached via the senses. Cognitive linguists study the embodiment of knowledge by seeking expressions which relate to modal schemas.

A closely related approach is evolutionary linguistics which includes the study of linguistic units as cultural replicators. It is possible to study how language replicates and adapts to the mind of the individual or the speech community.

The generative versus evolutionary approach are sometimes called formalism and functionalism, respectively. This reference is however different from the use of the terms in human sciences.

Methodology

Linguistics is primarily descriptive. Linguists describe and explain features of language without making subjective judgments on whether a particular feature or usage is "good" or "bad". This is analogous to practice in other sciences: a zoologist studies the animal kingdom without making subjective judgments on whether a particular species is "better" or "worse" than another.

Prescription, on the other hand, is an attempt to promote particular linguistic usages over others, often favouring a particular dialect or "acrolect". This may have the aim of establishing a linguistic standard, which can aid communication over large geographical areas. It may also, however, be an attempt by speakers of one language or dialect to exert influence over speakers of other languages or dialects (see Linguistic imperialism). An extreme version of prescriptivism can be found among censors, who attempt to eradicate words and structures that they consider to be destructive to society. Prescription, however, may be practised appropriately in language instruction, like in ELT, where certain fundamental grammatical rules and lexical items need to be introduced to a second-language speaker who is attempting to acquire the language.

Anthropology

The objective of describing languages is often to uncover cultural knowledge about communities. The use of anthropological methods of investigation on linguistic sources leads to the discovery of certain cultural traits among a speech community through its linguistic features. It is also widely used as a tool in language documentation, with an endeavour to curate endangered languages. However, linguistic inquiry now uses the anthropological method to understand cognitive, historical, sociolinguistic and historical processes that languages undergo as they change and evolve, as well as general anthropological inquiry uses the linguistic method to excavate into culture. In all aspects, anthropological inquiry usually uncovers the different variations and relativities that underlie the usage of language.

Sources

Most contemporary linguists work under the assumption that spoken data and signed data are more fundamental than written data. This is because

Speech appears to be universal to all human beings capable of producing and perceiving it, while there have been many cultures and speech communities that lack written communication;

Features appear in speech which aren't always recorded in writing, including phonological rules, sound changes, and speech errors;

All natural writing systems reflect a spoken language (or potentially a signed one), even with pictographic scripts like Dongba writing Naxi homophones with the same pictogram, and text in writing systems used for two languages changing to fit the spoken language being recorded;

Speech evolved before human beings invented writing;

People learnt to speak and process spoken language more easily and earlier than they did with writing.

Nonetheless, linguists agree that the study of written language can be worthwhile and valuable. For research that relies on corpus linguistics and computational linguistics, written language is often much more convenient for processing large amounts of linguistic data. Large corpora of spoken language are difficult to create and hard to find, and are typically transcribed and written. In addition, linguists have turned to text-based discourse occurring in various formats of computer-mediated communication as a viable site for linguistic inquiry.

The study of writing systems themselves, graphemics, is, in any case, considered a branch of linguistics.

Analysis

Before the 20th century, linguists analysed language on a diachronic plane, which was historical in focus. This meant that they would compare linguistic features and try to analyse language from the point of view of how it had changed between then and later. However, with Saussurean linguistics in the 20th century, the focus shifted to a more synchronic approach, where the study was more geared towards analysis and comparison between different language variations, which existed at the same given point of time.

At another level, the syntagmatic plane of linguistic analysis entails the comparison between the way words are sequenced, within the syntax of a sentence. For example, the article "the" is followed by a noun, because of the syntagmatic relation between the words. The paradigmatic plane on the other hand, focuses on an analysis that is based on the paradigms or concepts that are embedded in a given text. In this case, words of the same type or class may be replaced in the text with each other to achieve the same conceptual understanding.

History

Elias Lönnrot (1802–1884) was a linguist who made long journeys collecting and compiling lyric poems and folk ballads from different parts of the land (mainly in Karelia) into a epic collection called the Kalevala, which is later known, for example, to have partly inspired the author J. R. R. Tolkien to create his own legendarium.

Main article: History of linguistics

Nomenclature

Before the 20th century, the term philology, first attested in 1716, was commonly used to refer to the study of language, which was then predominantly historical in focus. Since Ferdinand de Saussure's insistence on the importance of synchronic analysis, however, this focus has shifted and the term philology is now generally used for the "study of a language's grammar, history, and literary tradition", especially in the United States (where philology has never been very popularly considered as the "science of language").

Although the term "linguist" in the sense of "a student of language" dates from 1641, the term "linguistics" is first attested in 1847. It is now the usual term in English for the scientific study of language, though linguistic science is sometimes used.

Linguistics is a multi-disciplinary field of research that combines tools from natural sciences, social sciences, and the humanities. Many linguists, such as David Crystal, conceptualize the field as being primarily scientific. The term linguist applies to someone who studies language or is a researcher within the field, or to someone who uses the tools of the discipline to describe and analyse specific languages.

Early grammarians

Main articles: Philology and History of English grammars

The formal study of language began in India with Pāṇini, the 6th century BC grammarian who formulated 3,959 rules of Sanskrit morphology. Pāṇini's systematic classification of the sounds of Sanskrit into consonants and vowels, and word classes, such as nouns and verbs, was the first known instance of its kind. In the Middle East, Sibawayh, a Persian, made a detailed description of Arabic in AD 760 in his monumental work, Al-kitab fi al-nahw (الكتاب في النحو, The Book on Grammar), the first known author to distinguish between sounds and phonemes (sounds as units of a linguistic system). Western interest in the study of languages began somewhat later than in the East, but the grammarians of the classical languages did not use the same methods or reach the same conclusions as their contemporaries in the Indic world. Early interest in language in the West was a part of philosophy, not of grammatical description. The first insights into semantic theory were made by Plato in his Cratylus dialogue, where he argues that words denote concepts that are eternal and exist in the world of ideas. This work is the first to use the word etymology to describe the history of a word's meaning. Around 280 BC, one of Alexander the Great's successors founded a university (see Musaeum) in Alexandria, where a school of philologists studied the ancient texts in and taught Greek to speakers of other languages. While this school was the first to use the word "grammar" in its modern sense, Plato had used the word in its original meaning as "téchnē grammatikḗ" (Τέχνη Γραμματική), the "art of writing", which is also the title of one of the most important works of the Alexandrine school by Dionysius Thrax. Throughout the Middle Ages, the study of language was subsumed under the topic of philology, the study of ancient languages and texts, practised by such educators as Roger Ascham, Wolfgang Ratke, and John Amos Comenius.

Comparative philology

In the 18th century, the first use of the comparative method by William Jones sparked the rise of comparative linguistics. Bloomfield attributes "the first great scientific linguistic work of the world" to Jacob Grimm, who wrote Deutsche Grammatik. It was soon followed by other authors writing similar comparative studies on other language groups of Europe. The study of language was broadened from Indo-European to language in general by Wilhelm von Humboldt, of whom Bloomfield asserts:

This study received its foundation at the hands of the Prussian statesman and scholar Wilhelm von Humboldt (1767–1835), especially in the first volume of his work on Kavi, the literary language of Java, entitled Über die Verschiedenheit des menschlichen Sprachbaues und ihren Einfluß auf die geistige Entwickelung des Menschengeschlechts (On the Variety of the Structure of Human Language and its Influence upon the Mental Development of the Human Race).

20th century developments

There was a shift of focus from historical and comparative linguistics to synchronic analysis in early 20th century. Structural analysis was improved by Leonard Bloomfield, Louis Hjelmslev; and Zellig Harris who also developed methods of discourse analysis. Functional analysis was developed by the Prague linguistic circle and André Martinet. As sound recording devices became commonplace in the 1960s, dialectal recordings were made and archived, and the audio-lingual method provided a technological solution to foreign language learning. The 1960s also saw a new rise of comparative linguistics: the study of language universals in linguistic typology. Towards the end of the century the field of linguistics became divided into further areas of interest with the advent of language technology and digitalised corpora.

Areas of research

Ecolinguistics

Ecolinguistics explores the role of language in the life-sustaining interactions of humans, other species and the physical environment. The first aim is to develop linguistic theories which see humans not only as part of society, but also as part of the larger ecosystems that life depends on. The second aim is to show how linguistics can be used to address key ecological issues, from climate change and biodiversity loss to environmental justice.

Sociolinguistics

Sociolinguistics is the study of how language is shaped by social factors. This sub-discipline focuses on the synchronic approach of linguistics, and looks at how a language in general, or a set of languages, display variation and varieties at a given point in time. The study of language variation and the different varieties of language through dialects, registers, and idiolects can be tackled through a study of style, as well as through analysis of discourse. Sociolinguists research both style and discourse in language, as well as the theoretical factors that are at play between language and society.

Developmental linguistics

Developmental linguistics is the study of the development of linguistic ability in individuals, particularly the acquisition of language in childhood. Some of the questions that developmental linguistics looks into is how children acquire different languages, how adults can acquire a second language, and what the process of language acquisition is.

Neurolinguistics

Neurolinguistics is the study of the structures in the human brain that underlie grammar and communication. Researchers are drawn to the field from a variety of backgrounds, bringing along a variety of experimental techniques as well as widely varying theoretical perspectives. Much work in neurolinguistics is informed by models in psycholinguistics and theoretical linguistics, and is focused on investigating how the brain can implement the processes that theoretical and psycholinguistics propose are necessary in producing and comprehending language. Neurolinguists study the physiological mechanisms by which the brain processes information related to language, and evaluate linguistic and psycholinguistic theories, using aphasiology, brain imaging, electrophysiology, and computer modelling. Amongst the structures of the brain involved in the mechanisms of neurolinguistics, the cerebellum which contains the highest numbers of neurons has a major role in terms of predictions required to produce language.

Applied linguistics

Main article: Applied linguistics

Linguists are largely concerned with finding and describing the generalities and varieties both within particular languages and among all languages. Applied linguistics takes the results of those findings and "applies" them to other areas. Linguistic research is commonly applied to areas such as language education, lexicography, translation, language planning, which involves governmental policy implementation related to language use, and natural language processing. "Applied linguistics" has been argued to be something of a misnomer. Applied linguists actually focus on making sense of and engineering solutions for real-world linguistic problems, and not literally "applying" existing technical knowledge from linguistics. Moreover, they commonly apply technical knowledge from multiple sources, such as sociology (e.g., conversation analysis) and anthropology. (Constructed language fits under Applied linguistics.)

Today, computers are widely used in many areas of applied linguistics. Speech synthesis and speech recognition use phonetic and phonemic knowledge to provide voice interfaces to computers. Applications of computational linguistics in machine translation, computer-assisted translation, and natural language processing are areas of applied linguistics that have come to the forefront. Their influence has had an effect on theories of syntax and semantics, as modelling syntactic and semantic theories on computers constraints.

Linguistic analysis is a sub-discipline of applied linguistics used by many governments to verify the claimed nationality of people seeking asylum who do not hold the necessary documentation to prove their claim. This often takes the form of an interview by personnel in an immigration department. Depending on the country, this interview is conducted either in the asylum seeker's native language through an interpreter or in an international lingua franca like English. Australia uses the former method, while Germany employs the latter; the Netherlands uses either method depending on the languages involved. Tape recordings of the interview then undergo language analysis, which can be done either by private contractors or within a department of the government. In this analysis, linguistic features of the asylum seeker are used by analysts to make a determination about the speaker's nationality. The reported findings of the linguistic analysis can play a critical role in the government's decision on the refugee status of the asylum seeker.

Semiotics

Semiotics is the study of sign processes (semiosis), or signification and communication, signs, and symbols, both individually and grouped into sign systems, including the study of how meaning is constructed and understood. Semioticians often do not restrict themselves to linguistic communication when studying the use of signs but extend the meaning of "sign" to cover all kinds of cultural symbols. Nonetheless, semiotic disciplines closely related to linguistics are literary studies, discourse analysis, text linguistics, and philosophy of language. Semiotics, within the linguistics paradigm, is the study of the relationship between language and culture. Historically, Edward Sapir and Ferdinand De Saussure's structuralist theories influenced the study of signs extensively until the late part of the 20th century, but later, post-modern and post-structural thought, through language philosophers including Jacques Derrida, Mikhail Bakhtin, Michel Foucault, and others, have also been a considerable influence on the discipline in the late part of the 20th century and early 21st century. These theories emphasize the role of language variation, and the idea of subjective usage, depending on external elements like social and cultural factors, rather than merely on the interplay of formal elements.

Language documentation

Language documentation combines anthropological inquiry (into the history and culture of language) with linguistic inquiry, in order to describe languages and their grammars. Lexicography involves the documentation of words that form a vocabulary. Such a documentation of a linguistic vocabulary from a particular language is usually compiled in a dictionary. Computational linguistics is concerned with the statistical or rule-based modeling of natural language from a computational perspective. Specific knowledge of language is applied by speakers during the act of translation and interpretation, as well as in language education – the teaching of a second or foreign language. Policy makers work with governments to implement new plans in education and teaching which are based on linguistic research.

Since the inception of the discipline of linguistics, linguists have been concerned with describing and analysing previously undocumented languages. Starting with Franz Boas in the early 1900s, this became the main focus of American linguistics until the rise of formal linguistics in the mid-20th century. This focus on language documentation was partly motivated by a concern to document the rapidly disappearing languages of indigenous peoples. The ethnographic dimension of the Boasian approach to language description played a role in the development of disciplines such as sociolinguistics, anthropological linguistics, and linguistic anthropology, which investigate the relations between language, culture, and society.

The emphasis on linguistic description and documentation has also gained prominence outside North America, with the documentation of rapidly dying indigenous languages becoming a primary focus in many university programmes in linguistics. Language description is a work-intensive endeavour, usually requiring years of field work in the language concerned, so as to equip the linguist to write a sufficiently accurate reference grammar. Further, the task of documentation requires the linguist to collect a substantial corpus in the language in question, consisting of texts and recordings, both sound and video, which can be stored in an accessible format within open repositories, and used for further research.

Translation

The sub-field of translation includes the translation of written and spoken texts across media, from digital to print and spoken. To translate literally means to transmute the meaning from one language into another. Translators are often employed by organizations such as travel agencies and governmental embassies to facilitate communication between two speakers who do not know each other's language. Translators are also employed to work within computational linguistics setups like Google Translate, which is an automated program to translate words and phrases between any two or more given languages. Translation is also conducted by publishing houses, which convert works of writing from one language to another in order to reach varied audiences. Academic translators specialize in or are familiar with various other disciplines such as technology, science, law, economics, etc.

Clinical linguistics

Clinical linguistics is the application of linguistic theory to the field of speech-language pathology. Speech language pathologists work on corrective measures to treat communication and swallowing disorders.

Chaika (1990) showed that people with schizophrenia who display speech disorders like rhyming inappropriately have attentional dysfunction, as when a patient was shown a color chip and then asked to identify it, responded "looks like clay. Sounds like gray. Take you for a roll in the hay. Heyday, May Day." The color chip was actually clay-colored, so his first response was correct.'

However, most people suppress or ignore words which rhyme with what they've said unless they are deliberately producing a pun, poem or rap. Even then, the speaker shows connection between words chosen for rhyme and an overall meaning in discourse. People with schizophrenia with speech dysfunction show no such relation between rhyme and reason. Some even produce stretches of gibberish combined with recognizable words.

Computational linguistics

Computational linguistics is the study of linguistic issues in a way that is "computationally responsible", i.e., taking careful note of computational consideration of algorithmic specification and computational complexity, so that the linguistic theories devised can be shown to exhibit certain desirable computational properties and their implementations. Computational linguists also work on computer language and software development.

Evolutionary linguistics

Main article: Evolutionary linguistics

Evolutionary linguistics is the study of the emergence of the language faculty through human evolution, and also the application of evolutionary theory to the study of cultural evolution among different languages. It is also a study of the dispersal of various languages across the globe, through movements among ancient communities. Evolutionary linguistics is a highly interdisciplinary field, including linguists, biologists, neuroscientists, psychologists, mathematicians, and others. By shifting the focus of investigation in linguistics to a comprehensive scheme that embraces the natural sciences, it seeks to yield a framework by which the fundamentals of language are understood.

Forensic linguistics

Forensic linguistics is the application of linguistic analysis to forensics. Forensic analysis investigates the style, language, lexical use, and other linguistic and grammatical features used in the legal context to provide evidence in courts of law. Forensic linguists have also used their expertise in the framework of criminal cases.

See also

This "see also" section may contain an excessive number of suggestions. Please ensure that only the most relevant links are given, that they are not red links, and that any links are not already in this article. (August 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Linguistics portal

Language portal

Anthroponymy

Articulatory phonology

Articulatory synthesis

Asemic writing

Axiom of categoricity

Biosemiotics

Cognitive science

Concept mining

Critical discourse analysis

Cryptanalysis

Decipherment

Global language system

Grammarian (Greco-Roman world)

Index of linguistics articles

Integrational linguistics

Integrationism

Intercultural competence

International Congress of Linguists

International Linguistics Olympiad

Language attrition

Language engineering

Language geography

Linguistic typology

List of departments of linguistics

List of summer schools of linguistics

Metacommunicative competence

Microlinguistics

Onomastics

Outline of linguistics

Reading

Rhythm § Linguistics

Speaker recognition

Speech processing

Stratificational linguistics

References

^ Halliday, Michael A.K.; Jonathan Webster (2006). On Language and Linguistics. Continuum International Publishing Group. p. vii. ISBN 978-0-8264-8824-4.

^ a b Martinet, André (1960). Elements of General Linguistics. Studies in General Linguistics, vol. i. Translated by Elisabeth Palmer Rubbert. London: Faber. p. 15.

^ Jakobson, Roman (1937). Six Lectures on Sound and Meaning. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. ISBN 978-0-262-60010-1.

^ "Journal of Language and Politics". John Benjamins Publishing Company.

^ Rens Bod (2014). A New History of the Humanities: The Search for Principles and Patterns from Antiquity to the Present. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-966521-1.

^ "Chapter VI: Sanskrit Literature". The Imperial Gazetteer of India. 2. 1908. p. 263.

^ S.C. Vasu (Tr.) (1996). The Ashtadhyayi of Panini (2 Vols.). Vedic Books. ISBN 978-81-208-0409-8.

^ Campbell, Lyle (1998). Historical Linguistics: An Introduction. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. p. 391. ISBN 978-0-7486-4601-2.

^ a b "Editors' Introduction: Foundations of the new historical linguistics." In. The Routledge Handbook of Historical Linguistics Routledge p. 25.

^ Baldi, Philip (2012). "Historical Linguistics and Cognitive Science" (PDF). Rheis, International Journal of Linguistics, Philology and Literature. 3 (1): 5–27. p. 11.

^ Wilson-Fowler, E.B., & Apel, K. (2015). "Influence of Morphological Awareness on College Students' Literacy Skills: A path Analytic Approach". Journal of Literacy Research. 47 (3): 405–32. doi:10.1177/1086296x15619730.

^ a b Mey, Jacob L. (1993) Pragmatics: An Introduction. Oxford: Blackwell (2nd ed. 2001).

^ "Meaning (Semantics and Pragmatics) | Linguistic Society of America". www.linguisticsociety.org. Retrieved 25 August 2017.

^ Shaozhong, Liu. "What is pragmatics?". Archived from the original on 7 March 2009. Retrieved 18 March 2009.

^ "What Is Pragmatics?". ThoughtCo. Retrieved 11 July 2017.

^ Selbach, Rachel (2008). "The superstrate is not always the lexifier: Lingua Franca in the Barbary Coast 1530—1830". In Michaelis, Susanne (ed.). Roots of creole structures: Weighing the contribution of substrates and superstrates. Creole Language Library. 33.

^ Oxford English dictionary.

^ Lippi-Green, Rosina (2012). English with an accent: Language, ideology and discrimination in the United States. Routledge.

^ Trudgill, P. (1994). Dialects. Ebooks Online Routledge. Florence, KY.

^ Jacques Derrida (1978). Writing and Difference. Translated by Alan Bass. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-14329-3.

^ Lea, Richard (18 November 2004). "Relative Thinking". The Guardian.

^ All references in this article to the study of sound should be taken to include the manual and non-manual signs used in sign languages.

^ Adrian Akmajian; Richard A. Demers; Ann K. Farmer; Robert M. Harnish (2010). Linguistics (6th ed.). The MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-51370-8. Archived from the original on 14 December 2012. Retrieved 25 July 2012.

^ Syntax: A Generative Introduction (Second Edition), 2013. Andrew Carnie. Blackwell Publishing.

^ Sharada Narayanan (2010). "Vakyapadiya: Sphota, Jati, and Dravya". The Hindu.

^ Chierchia, Gennaro & Sally McConnell-Ginet (2000). Meaning and Grammar: An Introduction to Semantics. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. ISBN 978-0-262-53164-1.

^ Ariel, Mira (2009). "Discourse, grammar, discourse". Discourse Studies. 11 (1): 5–36. doi:10.1177/1461445608098496. JSTOR 24049745.

^ Helen Leckie-Tarry, Language and Context: a Functional Linguistic Theory of Register, Continuum International Publishing Group, 1995, p. 6. ISBN 1-85567-272-3

^ Zuckermann, Ghil'ad (2003). Language Contact and Lexical Enrichment in Israeli Hebrew. Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 2ff. ISBN 978-1-4039-1723-2.

^ Stylistics" by Joybrato Mukherjee. Chapter 49. Encyclopedia of Linguistics" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 October 2013. Retrieved 4 October 2013.

^ IA Richards (1965). The Philosophy of Rhetoric. Oxford University Press (New York).

^ Writing and Difference by Jacques Derrida, 1967, and Of Grammatology

^ Chapter 1, section 1.1 in Elmer H. Antonsen (2002). Trends in Linguistics: Runes and Germanic Linguistics (6th ed.). Mouton de Gruyter. ISBN 978-3-11-017462-5.

^ Nöth, Winfried (1990). Handbook of Semiotics (PDF). Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-20959-7.

^ Hjelmslev, Louis (1969) . Prolegomena to a Theory of Language. University of Wisconsin Press. ISBN 0299024709.

^ de Saussure, Ferdinand (1959) . Course in general linguistics (PDF). New York: Philosophy Library. ISBN 9780231157278.

^ Schäfer, Roland (2016). Einführung in die grammatische Beschreibung des Deutschen (2nd ed.). Berlin: Language Science Press. ISBN 978-1-537504-95-7.

^ Halliday, M. A. K.; Matthiessen, Christian M. I. M. (2004). An Introduction to Functional Grammar (3rd ed.) (PDF). London: Hodder. ISBN 0-340-76167-9.

^ Daneš, František (1987). "On Prague school functionalism in linguistics". In Dirven, R.; Fried, V. (eds.). Functionalism in Linguistics. John Benjamins. pp. 3–38. ISBN 9789027215246.

^ Everaert, Martin; Huybregts, Marinus A. C.; Chomsky, Noam; Berwick, Robert C.; Bolhuis, Johan J. (2015). "Structures, not strings: linguistics as part of the cognitive sciences". Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 19 (12): 729–743. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2015.09.008. PMID 26564247. S2CID 3648651. Retrieved 5 January 2020.

^ Chomsky, Noam (1986). Knowledge of Language: Its Nature, Origin, and Use. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 9780275917616.

^ Progovac, Liljana (2016). "Review: Why only us? Language and evolution by Robert C. Berwick and Noam Chomsky" (PDF). Language. 92 (4): 992–996. doi:10.1353/lan.2016.0085. S2CID 171921594. Retrieved 14 January 2020.

^ Chomsky, Noam (2015). The Minimalist Program (2nd ed.). MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-52734-7.

^ Arbib, Michael A. (2015). "Language evolution – an emergentist perspective". In MacWhinney and O'Grady (ed.). Handbook of Language Emergence. Wiley. pp. 81–109. ISBN 9781118346136.

^ Tobin, Vera (2014). "Where do cognitive biases fit into cognitive linguistics?" (PDF). In Borkent (ed.). Language and the Creative Mind. Chicago University Press. pp. 347–363. ISBN 9789027286437.

^ del Carmen Guarddon Anelo, María (2010). "Metaphors and neuro-linguistic programming". The International Journal of Interdisciplinary Social Sciences. 5 (7): 151–162. doi:10.18848/1833-1882/CGP/v05i07/51812.

^ Ibarretxe-Antuñano, Iraide (2002). "MIND-AS-BODY as a Cross-linguistic Conceptual Metaphor" (PDF). Miscelánea. 25 (1): 93–119. Retrieved 15 July 2020.

^ Gibbs, R. W.; Colston, H. (1995). "The cognitive psychological reality of image schemas and their transformations". Cognitive Linguistics. 6: 347–378. doi:10.1515/cogl.1995.6.4.347.

^ Luodonpää-Manni, Milla; Penttilä, Esa; Viimaranta, Johanna (2017). "Introduction". In Luodonpää-Manni, Milla; Viimaranta, Johanna (eds.). Empirical Approaches to Cognitive Linguistics: Aalyzing Real-Life Data. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 1-4438-7325-X. Retrieved 30 June 2020.

^ Pleyer, Michael; Winters, James (2014). "Integrating cognitive linguistics and language evolution research". Theoria et Historia Scientiarum. 11: 19–44. doi:10.12775/ths-2014-002. Retrieved 16 January 2020.

^ Evans, Vyvyan; Green, Melanie (2006). Cognitive Linguistics. An Introduction. Routledge. ISBN 0748618317.

^ Croft, William (2008). "Evolutionary linguistics" (PDF). Annual Review of Anthropology. 37: 219–234. doi:10.1146/annurev.anthro.37.081407.085156. Retrieved 16 January 2020.

^ Cornish, Hanna; Tamariz, Monica; Kirby, Simon (2009). "Complex adaptive systems and the origins of adaptive structure: what experiments can tell us" (PDF). Language Learning. 59: 187–205. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9922.2009.00540.x. Retrieved 16 January 2020.

^ Sinnemäki, Kaius; Di Garbo, Francesca (2018). "Language Structures May Adapt to the Sociolinguistic Environment, but It Matters What and How You Count: A Typological Study of Verbal and Nominal Complexity". Frontiers in Psychology. 9: 187–205. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01141. PMC 6102949. PMID 30154738.

^ Nettle, Daniel (1999). "Functionalism and its difficulties in biology and linguistics". In Darnell (ed.). Functionalism and Formalism in linguistics, 1. Studies in Language Companion Series. 41. John Benjamins. pp. 445–468. doi:10.1075/slcs.41.21net. ISBN 9781556199271.

^ Croft, William (2015). "Functional approaches to grammar". International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences. 9 (2nd ed.). Elsevier. pp. 6323–6330. doi:10.1016/B978-0-08-097086-8.53009-8. ISBN 9780080970875.

^ Elias Lönnrot (1802 - 1884)

^ Kullervo: Tolkien's fascination with Finland - BBC

^ a b Harper, Douglas. "philology". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 5 March 2018.

^ Nichols, Stephen G. (1990). "Introduction: Philology in a Manuscript Culture". Speculum. 65 (1): 1–10. doi:10.2307/2864468. JSTOR 2864468.

^ McMahon, A.M.S. (1994). Understanding Language Change. Cambridge University Press. p. 19. ISBN 978-0-521-44665-5.

^ McMahon, A.M.S. (1994). Understanding Language Change. Cambridge University Press. p. 9. ISBN 978-0-521-44665-5.

^ Morpurgo Davies, A. (1998). Nineteenth-Century Linguistics. History of Linguistics. 4.

^ a b Harper, Douglas. "linguist". Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved 5 March 2018.

^ Spolsky, Bernard; Hult, Francis M. (February 2010). The Handbook of Educational Linguistics. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-4443-3104-2.

^ Berns, Margie (20 March 2010). Concise Encyclopedia of Applied Linguistics. Elsevier. pp. 23–25. ISBN 978-0-08-096503-1.

^ "The Science of Linguistics". Linguistic Society of America. Retrieved 17 April 2018. Modern linguists approach their work with a scientific perspective, although they use methods that used to be thought of as solely an academic discipline of the humanities. Contrary to previous belief, linguistics is multidisciplinary. It overlaps each of the human sciences including psychology, neurology, anthropology, and sociology. Linguists conduct formal studies of sound structure, grammar and meaning, but they also investigate the history of language families, and research language acquisition.

^ Crystal, David (1990). Linguistics. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-013531-2.

^ "Linguist". The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. 2000. ISBN 978-0-395-82517-4.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ Bloomfield 1983, p. 307.

^ Seuren, Pieter A. M. (1998). Western linguistics: An historical introduction. Wiley-Blackwell. pp. 2–24. ISBN 978-0-631-20891-4.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ Bloomfield 1983, p. 308.

^ Bloomfield 1983, p. 310.

^ a b Bloomfield 1983, p. 311.

^ "Ecolinguistics Association".

^ Mariën, Peter; Manto, Mario (25 October 2017). "Cerebellum as a Master-Piece for Linguistic Predictability". Cerebellum (London, England). 17 (2): 101–03. doi:10.1007/s12311-017-0894-1. ISSN 1473-4230. PMID 29071518.

^ Barbara Seidlhofer (2003). Controversies in Applied Linguistics (pp. 288). Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-437444-6.

^ a b c d Eades, Diana (2005). "Applied Linguistics and Language Analysis in Asylum Seeker Cases" (PDF). Applied Linguistics. 26 (4): 503–26. doi:10.1093/applin/ami021.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ Miller, Paul Allen (1998). "The Classical Roots of Post-Structuralism: Lacan, Derrida and Foucault". International Journal of the Classical Tradition. 5 (2): 204–25. doi:10.1007/bf02688423. JSTOR 30222818.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

^ Himmelman, Nikolaus "Language documentation: What is it and what is it good for?" in P. Gippert, Jost, Nikolaus P Himmelmann & Ulrike Mosel. (2006) Essentials of Language documentation. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin & New York.

^ Chaika, Elaine Ostrach. 1990. Understanding Psychotic Speech: Between Freud and Chomsky. Chas. Thomas Publishers.

^ Croft, William (October 2008). "Evolutionary Linguistics". Annual Review of Anthropology. 37: 219–34. doi:10.1146/annurev.anthro.37.081407.085156.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Bibliography

Akmajian, Adrian; Demers, Richard; Farmer, Ann; Harnish, Robert (2010). Linguistics: An Introduction to Language and Communication. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-51370-8.

Aronoff, Mark; Rees-Miller, Janie, eds. (2000). The handbook of linguistics. Oxford: Blackwell.

Bloomfield, Leonard (1983) . An Introduction to the Study of Language: New edition. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing. ISBN 978-90-272-8047-3.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Chomsky, Noam (1998). On Language. The New Press, New York. ISBN 978-1-56584-475-9.

Derrida, Jacques (1967). Of Grammatology. The Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-5830-7.

Hall, Christopher (2005). An Introduction to Language and Linguistics. Breaking the Language Spell. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-8264-8734-6.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Isac, Daniela; Charles Reiss (2013). I-language: An Introduction to Linguistics as Cognitive Science, 2nd edition. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-966017-9.

Pinker, Steven (1994). The Language Instinct. William Morrow and Company. ISBN 978-0-14-017529-5.

Crystal, David (1990). Linguistics. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-013531-2.

External links

 Library resources about

Linguistics

* * *

Resources in your library

Resources in other libraries

The Linguist List, a global online linguistics community with news and information updated daily

Glossary of linguistic terms by SIL International (last updated 2004)

Glottopedia, MediaWiki-based encyclopedia of linguistics, under construction

Linguistic sub-fields – according to the Linguistic Society of America

Linguistics and language-related wiki articles on Scholarpedia and Citizendium

"Linguistics" section – A Bibliography of Literary Theory, Criticism and Philology, ed. J.A. García Landa (University of Zaragoza, Spain)

Isac, Daniela; Charles Reiss (2013). I-language: An Introduction to Linguistics as Cognitive Science, 2nd edition. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-953420-3.

Linguistics at Curlie

v

t

e

Philosophy of language

Index of language articles

Philosophers 
Plato (Cratylus)

Gorgias

Confucius

Xunzi

Aristotle

Stoics

Pyrrhonists

Scholasticism

Ibn Rushd

Ibn Khaldun

Thomas Hobbes

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz

Johann Herder

Ludwig Noiré

Wilhelm von Humboldt

Fritz Mauthner

Paul Ricœur

Ferdinand de Saussure

Gottlob Frege

Franz Boas

Paul Tillich

Edward Sapir

Leonard Bloomfield

Zhuangzi

Henri Bergson

Lev Vygotsky

Ludwig Wittgenstein
Philosophical Investigations

Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus

Bertrand Russell

Rudolf Carnap

Jacques Derrida
Of Grammatology

Limited Inc

Benjamin Lee Whorf

Gustav Bergmann

J. L. Austin

Noam Chomsky

Hans-Georg Gadamer

Saul Kripke

A. J. Ayer

G. E. M. Anscombe

Jaakko Hintikka

Michael Dummett

Donald Davidson

Roger Gibson

Paul Grice

Gilbert Ryle

P. F. Strawson

Willard Van Orman Quine

Hilary Putnam

David Lewis

John Searle

Joxe Azurmendi

Scott Soames

Stephen Yablo

John Hawthorne

Stephen Neale

Paul Watzlawick

Theories 
Causal theory of reference

Contrast theory of meaning

Contrastivism

Conventionalism

Cratylism

Deconstruction

Descriptivism

Direct reference theory

Dramatism

Expressivism

Linguistic determinism

Mediated reference theory

Nominalism

Non-cognitivism

Phallogocentrism

Relevance theory

Semantic externalism

Semantic holism

Structuralism

Supposition theory

Symbiosism

Theological noncognitivism

Theory of descriptions (Definite description)

Unilalianism

Verification theory

Concepts 
Ambiguity

Cant

Linguistic relativity

Meaning

Language

Truth-bearer

Proposition

Use–mention distinction

Concept

Categories

Set

Class

Family resemblance

Intension

Logical form

Metalanguage

Mental representation

Presupposition

Principle of compositionality

Property

Sign

Sense and reference

Speech act

Symbol

Sentence

Statement

more...

Related articles 
Analytic philosophy

Philosophy of information

Philosophical logic

Linguistics

Pragmatics

Rhetoric

Semantics

Formal semantics

Semiotics

Category

Task Force

Discussion

v

t

e

Communication studies

History

Outline

Topics and

terminology

Biocommunication

Broadcasting

Communication

Computer-mediated communication

Conversation

History of communication

Information

Intercultural / Interpersonal / Intrapersonal communication

Journalism

Mass media

Meaning

Media ecology

Meta-communication

Models of communication

New media

Nonverbal communication

Propaganda

Reading

Speech

Symbol

Telecommunication

Text and conversation theory

Writing

Subfields 
Communication design

Communication theory

Communicology

Crisis communication

Climate communication

Cross-cultural communication

Development communication

Discourse analysis

Environmental communication

Global communication

Health communication

International communication

Mass communication

Media studies

Mediated cross-border communication

Organizational communication

Political communication

Risk communication

Science communication

Technical communication

Visual communication

Closed-loop communication

Scholars 
Adorno

Barthes

Bateson

Benjamin

Burke

Castells

Chomsky

Craig

Fisher

Flusser

Gasset

Gerbner

Goffman

Habermas

Horkheimer

Huxley

Innis

Jakobson

Janis

Johnson

Kincaid

Lippman

Luhmann

Marcuse

McLuhan

Mead

Morgan

Ong

Packard

Peirce

Postman

Quebral

Richards

Rogers

Schramm

Tankard

Tannen

Wertheimer

 Category

v

t

e

Social sciences

Outline

History

Index

Primary 
Anthropology (archaeology

cultural

linguistics

social)

Economics (microeconomics

macroeconomics

econometrics

mathematical)

Geography (human

integrative)

History
cultural

auxiliary sciences

economic

human

military

political

social)

Law (jurisprudence

legal history

legal systems

public law

private law)

Political science (international relations

comparative

theory

public policy)

Psychology (abnormal

cognitive

developmental

personality

social)

Sociology (criminology

demography

internet

rural

urban)

Interdisciplinary 
Administration (business

public)

Anthrozoology

Area studies

Business studies

Cognitive science

Communication studies

Community studies

Cultural studies

Development studies

Education

Environmental (social science

studies)

Food studies

Gender studies

Global studies

History of technology

Human ecology

Information science

International studies

Linguistics

Media studies

Philosophy of science (economics

history

psychology

social science)

Planning (land use

regional

urban)

Political ecology

Political economy

Public health

Regional science

Science and technology studies

Science studies
historical

Quantum social science

Social work

Vegan studies

List 
List of social science journals

Other categorizations 
Humanities

Geisteswissenschaft

Human science

 Category

 Commons

 Society portal

 Wikiversity

 Find out more on Wikipedia's

Sister projects Media

from Commons

News stories

from Wikinews

Definitions

from Wiktionary

Textbooks

from Wikibooks

Quotations

from Wikiquote

Source texts

from Wikisource

Learning resources

from Wikiversity

Data

from Wikidata

Authority control 
BNE: XX525047

BNF: cb11932194d (data)

GND: 4074250-7

LCCN: sh85077222

NDL: 00562334
