"For the taekwondo fighter, see Liu Xiaobo (taekwondo).

This is a Chinese name; the family name is Liu.

Chinese literary critic, writer, professor, and human rights activist

Liu Xiaobo

刘晓波

Born (1955-12-28)28 December 1955

Changchun, Jilin, China

Died 13 July 2017(2017-07-13) (aged 61)

Shenyang, Liaoning, China

Nationality Chinese

Alma mater 
Jilin University (BA)

Beijing Normal University (BA, PhD)

Occupation Writer, political commentator, human rights activist

Spouse(s) Tao Li

​

(m. 1982; div. 1989)

Liu Xia (m. 1996)

Children 1

Awards 2010 Nobel Peace Prize

Liu Xiaobo

"Liu Xiaobo" in Simplified (top) and Traditional (bottom) Chinese characters

Simplified Chinese 刘晓波

Traditional Chinese 劉曉波

Transcriptions

Standard Mandarin

Hanyu Pinyin Liú Xiǎobō

Wade–Giles Liu2 Hsiao3-po1

IPA 

Liu Xiaobo (Chinese: 刘晓波, 28 December 1955 – 13 July 2017) was a Chinese writer, literary critic, human rights activist, philosopher and Nobel Peace Prize laureate who called for political reforms and was involved in campaigns to end communist one-party rule in China. He was incarcerated as a political prisoner in Jinzhou, Liaoning. On 26 June 2017, he was granted medical parole after being diagnosed with liver cancer and he died on 13 July 2017.

Liu rose to fame in literary circles in 1980s with his literary critiques and he eventually became a visiting scholar at several overseas universities. He returned to China to support the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and was imprisoned for the first time from 1989 to 1991, again from 1995 to 1996 and yet again from 1996 to 1999 for his involvement on suspicion of inciting subversion of state power. He served as the President of the Independent Chinese PEN Center, from 2003 to 2007. He was also the president of Minzhu Zhongguo (Democratic China) magazine starting in the mid-1990s. On 8 December 2008, Liu was detained due to his participation with the Charter 08 manifesto. He was formally arrested on 23 June 2009 on suspicion of "inciting subversion of state power". He was tried on the same charges on 23 December 2009, and sentenced to eleven years' imprisonment and two years' deprivation of political rights on 25 December 2009.

During his fourth prison term, Liu was awarded the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize for "his long and non-violent struggle for fundamental human rights in China."

Liu was the first Chinese citizen to be awarded a Nobel Prize of any kind while residing in China. He was the third person to have been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize while in prison or detention, after Germany's Carl von Ossietzky (1935) and Burma's Aung San Suu Kyi (1991). He was the second person to have been denied the right to have a representative collect the Nobel Prize for him as well as the second to die in custody, with the first being Ossietzky, who died in Westend hospital in Berlin-Charlottenburg after being detained in a Nazi concentration camp. Berit Reiss-Andersen, chairman of the Norwegian Nobel Committee, blamed the Chinese communist regime for his death and said that "Liu Xiaobo had contributed to the fraternity of peoples through his non-violent resistance against the oppressive actions of the Communist regime in China."

Contents

1 Early life and work

2 Thoughts and political views

2.1 On Chinese and Western cultures

2.2 On Chinese democracy

2.3 On the Islamic World

3 Human rights activities

4 Charter 08

4.1 Conception and diffusion of Charter 08

5 2008–2017 arrest, trial, and imprisonment

5.1 Arrest

5.2 Trial

6 Nobel Peace Prize

7 Medical parole and health

8 Death and funeral

8.1 Censorship

8.2 Funeral

8.3 Reactions

8.3.1 Sino-area

8.3.2 International

8.3.2.1 States

8.3.2.2 Organizations

9 Major works

10 Awards and honors

11 See also

12 References

13 External links

Early life and work

Liu was born on 28 December 1955 in Changchun, Jilin province, to a family of intellectuals. Liu's father, Liu Ling (刘伶), was born in 1931 in Huaide County, Jilin. A professor of Chinese at Northeast Normal University, he died of liver disease in September 2011.
Liu's mother, Zhang Suqin (张素勤), worked in the Northeast Normal University Nursery School. Liu Xiaobo was the third-born in a family of five boys.

His eldest brother Liu Xiaoguang (刘晓光), Dalian import and export clothing company manager, retired. He was estranged from Liu Xiaobo after the 1989 Tiananmen protests.

His second brother, Liu Xiaohui (刘晓晖), is a historian who graduated from the Department of History of Northeast Normal University, and who became deputy director of the Museum of Jilin Province.

His fourth brother Liu Xiaoxuan (刘晓暄), born in 1957, is professor of Energy and Materials, Guangdong University of Technology, engaged in optical functional polymer materials and light curing application technology research. In 1995, he was admitted as a PhD student at Tsinghua University, but Liu Xiaobo's political activities meant he was not allowed to take the examinations.

His youngest brother, Liu Xiaodong (刘晓东), died of heart disease early in the 1990s

In 1969, during the Down to the Countryside Movement, Liu's father took him to Horqin Right Front Banner, Inner Mongolia. His father was a professor who remained loyal to the Communist Party. After finishing middle school in 1974, he was sent to the countryside to work on a farm in Jilin.

In 1977, Liu was admitted to the Department of Chinese Literature at Jilin University, where he founded a poetry group known as "The Innocent Hearts" (Chi Zi Xin) with six schoolmates. In 1982, he graduated with a BA in literature before being admitted to the Department of Chinese Literature at Beijing Normal University as a research student, where he received an MA in literature in 1984 and started teaching as a lecturer thereafter. That year, he married Tao Li, with whom he had a son named Liu Tao in 1985.

In 1986, Liu started his doctoral study program and published his literary critiques in various magazines. He became well known as a "dark horse" for his radical opinions and sharp comments on the official doctrines and establishments. Opinions such as these shocked both literary and ideological circles, and his influence on Chinese intellectuals was dubbed the "Liu Xiaobo Shock" or the "Liu Xiaobo Phenomenon". In 1987, his first book, Criticism of the Choice: Dialogues with Li Zehou, was published and became a non-fiction bestseller. It comprehensively criticized the Chinese tradition of Confucianism and posed a frank challenge to Li Zehou, a rising ideological star who had a strong influence on young intellectuals in China at the time.

In June 1988, Liu received a PhD in literature. His doctoral thesis, Aesthetic and Human Freedom, passed the examination unanimously and was published as his second book. That same year he became a lecturer at the same department. He soon became a visiting scholar at several universities, including Columbia University, the University of Oslo, and the University of Hawaii. During the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests, Liu was in the United States but he decided to return to China to join the movement. He was later named one of the "four junzis of Tiananmen Square" for persuading students to leave the square and thus saving hundreds of lives. That year also saw the publication of his third book, The Fog of Metaphysics, a comprehensive review of Western philosophies. Soon, all of his works were banned in China.

Thoughts and political views

On Chinese and Western cultures

Evolving from his aesthetic notion of "individual subjectivity" as opposed to Li Zehou's theory of aesthetic subjectivity which combined Marxist materialism and Kantian idealism, he upheld the notion of "aesthetic freedom" which was based on the individualistic conception of freedom and aesthetics. He also strongly criticized Chinese intellectuals' "traditional attitude of searching for rationalism and harmony as a slave mentality" just as it was criticized by radical left-wing literary critic Lu Xun during the New Culture Movement. He also echoed the New Cultural Movement's call for wholesale westernization and the rejection of Chinese traditional culture. In a 1988 interview with Hong Kong's Liberation Monthly (now known as Open Magazine), he said "modernization means wholesale westernization, choosing a human life is choosing a Western way of life. The difference between the Western and the Chinese governing system is humane vs in-humane, there's no middle ground ... Westernization is not a choice of a nation, but a choice for the human race."

In that same interview, Liu was asked what it would take for China to realize a true historical transformation. He replied:

 300 years of colonialism. In 100 years of colonialism, Hong Kong has changed to what we see today. With China being so big, of course it would require 300 years as a colony for it to be able to transform into how Hong Kong is today. I have my doubts as to whether 300 years would be enough.

In an article in The New York Review of Books, Simon Leys wrote that Liu Xiaobo's perception of the West and its relationship to a modernizing China evolved during his travels in the United States and Europe in the 1980s.

During a visit to the Metropolitan Museum in New York City, he experienced a sort of epiphany that crystallized the turmoil of his latest self-questioning: he realized the shallowness of his own learning in the light of the fabulous riches of the diverse civilizations of the past, and simultaneously perceived the inadequacy of contemporary Western answers to mankind’s modern predicament. His own dream that Westernization could be used to reform China suddenly appeared to him as pathetic as the attitude of 'a paraplegic laughing at a quadriplegic', he confessed at the time:

My tendency to idealize Western civilization arises from my nationalistic desire to use the West in order to reform China. But this has led me to overlook the flaws of Western culture ... I have been obsequious toward Western civilization, exaggerating its merits, and at the same time exaggerating my own merits. I have viewed the West as if it were not only the salvation of China but also the natural and ultimate destination of all humanity. Moreover I have used this delusional idealism to assign myself the role of savior ... I now realize that Western civilization, while it can be useful in reforming China in its present stage, cannot save humanity in an overall sense. If we stand back from Western civilization for a moment, we can see that it possesses all the flaws of humanity in general ... If I, as a person who has lived under China's autocratic system for more than thirty years, want to reflect on the fate of humanity or how to be an authentic person, I have no choice but to carry out two critiques simultaneously.

I must:

Use Western civilization as a tool to critique China.

Use my own creativity to critique the West.

In 2002, he reflected on his Mao-style radical aesthetic and his political views in his earlier life in the 1980s:

I realize my entire youth and early writings had all been nurtured in hatred, violence and arrogance, or lies, cynicism and sarcasm. I knew at that time that Mao-style thinking and Cultural Revolution-style language had become ingrained in me, and my goal had been to transform myself . It may take me a lifetime to get rid of the poison.

Liu admitted in 2006 in another interview with Open Magazine (formerly known as Liberation Monthly) that his 1988 response of "300 years of colonialism" was extemporaneous, although he did not intend to take it back, because it represented "an extreme expression of his longheld belief". The quote was nonetheless used against him. He has commented, "Even today , radical patriotic 'angry youth' still frequently use these words to paint me with 'treason'."

On Chinese democracy

In his letter to his friend Liao Yiwu in 2000, he expressed his thoughts on the prospects of the democracy movement in China:

Compared to others under the Communist black curtain, we cannot call ourselves real men. Through the great tragedies of all these years, we still don't have a righteous giant like  Havel. In order for everyone to have the right to be selfish, there has to be a righteous giant who will sacrifice selflessly. In order to obtain "passive freedoms" (freedom from the arbitrary oppression by those in power), there has to be a will for active resistance. In history, nothing is fated. The appearance of a martyr will to completely change a nation's soul and raise the spiritual quality of the people. But Gandhi was by chance, Havel was by chance; two thousand years ago, a peasant's boy born in the manger was even more by chance. Human progress relies on the chance birth of these individuals. One cannot count on the collective conscience of the masses but only on the great individual conscience to consolidate the weak masses. In particular, our nation needs this righteous giant; the appeal of a role model is infinite; a symbol can rouse an abundance of moral resources. For example, Fang Lizhi's ability to walk out of the U.S. Embassy, or Zhao Ziyang's ability to actively resist after stepping down, or so-and-so refusing to go abroad. A very important reason for the silence and amnesia after June Fourth is that we did not have a righteous giant who stepped forward.

He was also a strong critic of Chinese nationalism, believing that the "abnormal nationalism" which had existed in China over the last century had turned from a defensive style which contained "mixed feelings of inferiority, envy, complaint, and blame" into an aggressive form of "patriotism" that was filled with "blind self-confidence, empty boasts, and pent-up hatred". The "ultra-nationalism", being deployed by the Chinese Communist Party since the Tiananmen protests, has also become "a euphemism for worship of violence in service of autocratic goals."

In 2009 during his trial for "inciting subversion of state power" due to his participation in drafting the Charter 08 manifesto which demanded freedom of expression, human rights and democratic elections, he wrote an essay known as "I Have No Enemies", stating that "the mentality of enmity can poison a nation's spirit, instigate brutal life and death struggles, destroy a society's tolerance and humanity, and block a nation's progress towards freedom and democracy", and he declared that he had no enemies, and no hatred.

On the Islamic World

In international affairs, he supported U.S. President George W. Bush's 2001 invasion of Afghanistan, his 2003 invasion of Iraq and his re-election.

In his 2004 article titled "Victory to the Anglo-American Freedom Alliance", he praised the U.S.-led post-Cold War conflicts as "best examples of how war should be conducted in a modern civilization." He wrote "regardless of the savagery of the terrorists, and regardless of the instability of Iraq's situation, and, what's more, regardless of how patriotic youth might despise proponents of the United States such as myself, my support for the invasion of Iraq will not waver. Just as, from the beginning, I believed that the military intervention of Britain and the United States would be victorious, I am still full of belief in the final victory of the Freedom Alliance and the democratic future of Iraq, and even if the armed forces of Britain and the United States should encounter some obstacles such as those that they are currently facing, this belief of mine will not change." He predicted "a free, democratic and peaceful Iraq will emerge."

He commented on Islamism that, "a culture and (religious) system that produced this kind of threat (Islamic fundamentalism), must be extremely intolerant and blood-thirsty." He also criticized the Iraq prison abuse scandals. During the 2004 US presidential election, Liu again praised Bush for his war effort against Iraq and condemned Democratic Party candidate John Kerry for not sufficiently supporting the wars in which the U.S. was then involved.

On Israel, he said "without America's protection, the long persecuted Jews who faced extermination during World War II, probably would again be drowned by the Islamic world's hatred." He had defended U.S. policies in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict, which he thought was the fault of the "provocateur" Palestinians.

Human rights activities

On 27 April 1989, Liu returned to Beijing and immediately became an active supporter of the popular movement. When the army seemed ready to violently eject the students who persistently occupied Tiananmen Square in order to challenge the government and the army that was enforcing its declaration of martial law, he initiated a four-man three-day hunger strike on 2 June. Later referred to as the "Tiananmen Four Gentlemen Hunger Strike", the action earned the trust of the students. He requested that both the government and the students abandon the ideology of class struggle and adopt a new political culture of dialogue and compromise. Although it was too late to prevent the massacre which started on the night of 3 June from occurring beyond the square, he and his colleagues successfully negotiated with the student leaders and the army commander so the several thousand students who remained in the square would all be allowed to peacefully withdraw from it, thus preventing a possibly much larger scale of bloodshed.

On 5 June, Liu was arrested and detained in Qincheng Prison for his alleged role in the movement, and three months later he was expelled from Beijing Normal University. The government's media issued numerous publications which labeled him a "mad dog" and a "black hand" because he had allegedly incited and manipulated the student movement to overthrow the government and socialism. His publications were banned, including his fourth book, Going Naked Toward God, which was then in press. In Taiwan however, his first and third books, Criticism of the Choice: Dialogues with Leading Thinker Li Zehou (1989), and the two-volume Mysteries of Thought and Dreams of Mankind (1990) were republished with some additions.

In January 1991, 19 months after his arrest, Liu Xiaobo was convicted of "counter-revolutionary propaganda and incitement" but he was exempted from criminal punishment due to his "major meritorious action" for preventing what could have been a bloody confrontation in Tiananmen Square. After his release, he was divorced and his ex-wife and son eventually emigrated to the US. He resumed his writing, mostly on human rights and political issues but he was not allowed to publish them in Mainland China.

In 1992, while in Taiwan, he published his first book after his imprisonment, The Monologues of a Doomsday's Survivor, a controversial memoir which contains his confessions and his political criticism of the popular movement in 1989.

In January 1993, Liu was invited to visit Australia and the United States for the interviews in the documentary film The Gate of Heavenly Peace. Although many of his friends suggested that he take refuge abroad, Liu returned to China in May 1993 and continued his freelance writing.

On 18 May 1995, the Chinese police took Liu into custody for launching a petition campaign on the eve of the sixth anniversary of the Tiananmen massacre, calling on the government to reassess the event and initiate political reform. He was held under residential surveillance in the suburbs of Beijing for nine months. He was released in February 1996 but was arrested again on 8 October for writing an October Tenth Declaration, co-authored by him and another prominent dissident, Wang Xizhe, mainly on the Taiwan issue, that advocated a peaceful reunification in order to oppose the Chinese Communist Party's forceful threats against the island. He was ordered to serve three years of re-education through labor "for disturbing public order" for that statement.

In 1996, while he was still imprisoned in the labor camp, Liu married Liu Xia. Because she was the only person from the outside allowed to visit him in prison, she was called his "most important link to the outside world."

After his release on 7 October 1999, Liu Xiaobo resumed his freelance writing. However, it was reported that the government built a sentry station next to his home and his phone calls and internet connections were tapped.

In 2000, while in Taiwan, Liu published the book A Nation That Lies to Conscience, a 400-page political criticism. Also published, in Hong Kong, was a Selection of Poems, a 450-page collection of the poems as correspondences between him and his wife during his imprisonment; it was co-authored by Liu and his wife. The last of three books which he published during the year was published in Mainland China, titled The Beauty Offers Me Drug: Literary Dialogues between Wang Shuo and Lao Xia, a 250-page collection of literary critiques co-authored by a popular young writer and himself under his unknown penname of "Lao Xiao". The same year, Liu participated in founding the Independent Chinese PEN Centre and he was elected to its board of directors and was also elected as its president in November 2003, and he was re-elected two years later. In 2007, he did not seek re-election as president but held his position as a board member until he was detained by the police in December 2008.

In 2003, when Liu started writing a Human Rights Report on China at his home, his computer, letters and documents were all confiscated by the government. He once said, "at Liu Xia's  birthday, her best friend brought two bottles of wine to  but was blocked by the police from coming in. I ordered a  cake and the police also rejected the man who delivered the cake to us. I quarreled with them and the police said, 'it is for the sake of your security. It has happened many bomb attacks in these days.'" Those measures were loosened until 2007, prior to the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games.

In January 2005, following the death of former Chinese Premier Zhao Ziyang, who had shown sympathy towards the student demonstrations in 1989, Liu was immediately put under house arrest for two weeks before he learned about the death of Zhao. The same year, he published two more books in the US, The Future of Free China Exists in Civil Society, and Single-Blade Poisonous Sword: Criticism of Chinese Nationalism.

Liu's writing is considered subversive by the Communist Party of China, and his name is censored. He called for multi-party elections and free markets, advocated the values of freedom, supported separation of powers and urged the governments to be accountable for its wrongdoings. When not in prison, he was the subject of government monitoring and he was also put under house arrest during times that the government considered politically sensitive.

Liu's human rights work received international recognition. In 2004, Reporters Without Borders awarded him the Fondation de France Prize as a defender of press freedom.

Prison terms for Liu Xiaobo
DatePrison termReasonResult

January 1991 June 1989 – January 1991 Inciting counterrevolution Imprisoned in Qincheng Prison awaiting trial, and discharged when he signed a "letter of repentance".

1995 May 1995 – January 1996 Being involved in the democracy and human rights movement and publicly voicing the need to redress the government's wrongdoing with regard to its suppression of the student protest of 1989 Released after being jailed for six months.

1996 3 years of re-education through labor Disturbing the social order Jailed in a labor education camp for three years. In 1996, he married Liu Xia. Released in 1999.

8 December 2008 11 years (died after 8,5 years) Suspicion of the subversion of state authority Sentenced to 11 years in prison and deprived of all political rights for two years. Imprisoned in Jinzhou Prison in Liaoning until he was transported to Shenyang's First Hospital of China Medical University, where he died.

Charter 08

Conception and diffusion of Charter 08

Main article: Charter 08

Political protest in Hong Kong against the detention of Liu Xiaobo

Liu Xiaobo actively participated in the writing of Charter 08 and signed it along with more than three hundred Chinese citizens. The Charter is a manifesto that was released on 10 December 2008 in order to coincide with the 60th anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It was written in the style of the Czechoslovak Charter 77, and calls for more freedom of expression, human rights, more democratic elections, the privatization of state enterprises and land, and economic liberalism. As of September 2010, the Charter has collected over 10,000 signatures.

2008–2017 arrest, trial, and imprisonment

Arrest

Two days before the official release of Charter 08, late on the evening of 8 December 2008, Liu was taken into custody by the police, as was Zhang Zuhua, another scholar and Charter 08 signatory. According to Zhang, the two were detained on suspicion of collecting signatures for the Charter. While Liu was detained in solitary confinement, he was forbidden to meet with either his lawyer or his family, but he was allowed to eat lunch with his wife, Liu Xia, and two policemen on New Year's Day 2009. On 23 June 2009, the Beijing procuratorate approved Liu's arrest on charges of "suspicion of inciting subversion of state power," a crime under Article 105 of China's Criminal Law. In a Xinhua news release announcing Liu's arrest, the Beijing Public Security Bureau alleged that Liu had incited the subversion of state power and the overthrow of the socialist system through methods such as spreading rumors and slander, citing almost verbatim Article 105; the Beijing PSB also noted that Liu had "fully confessed".

Trial

On 1 December 2009, Beijing police transferred Liu's case to the procuratorate for investigation and processing; on 10 December, the procuratorate formally indicted Liu on charges of "inciting subversion of state power" and sent his lawyers, Shang Baojun and Ding Xikui, the indictment document. He was tried at Beijing No. 1 Intermediate Court on 23 December 2009. His wife was not permitted to observe the hearing, although his brother-in-law was present. Diplomats from more than a dozen countries – including the U.S., Britain, Canada, Sweden, Australia and New Zealand – were denied access to the court in order to watch the trial and they all stood outside the court for its duration. Among them were Gregory May, political officer at the U.S. Embassy, and Nicholas Weeks, first secretary of the Swedish Embassy.

Liu wrote a statement, entitled "I have no enemies", intending for it to be read at his trial. He was never given the right to speak. The essay was later read in the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize ceremony, which Liu was unable to attend due to his imprisonment. On 25 December 2009, Liu was sentenced to eleven years' imprisonment and two years' deprivation of political rights by the Beijing No. 2 Intermediate Court on charges of "inciting subversion of state power". According to Liu's family and counsel, he planned to appeal the judgment. In the verdict, Charter 08 was named as part of the evidence supporting his conviction. John Pomfret of The Washington Post said Christmas Day was chosen to dump the news because the Chinese government believed Westerners were less likely to take notice on a holiday.

China's political reform ... should be gradual, peaceful, orderly and controllable and should be interactive, from above to below and from below to above. This way causes the least cost and leads to the most effective result. I know the basic principles of political change, that orderly and controllable social change is better than one which is chaotic and out of control. The order of a bad government is better than the chaos of anarchy. So I oppose systems of government that are dictatorships or monopolies. This is not 'inciting subversion of state power'. Opposition is not equivalent to subversion.

— Liu Xiaobo, 9 February 2010

Liu argued that his verdict violated China's constitution, and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights of the United Nations. He argued that charges against him of 'spreading rumours, slandering and in other ways inciting the subversion of the government and overturning the socialist system' were contrived, as he did not fabricate or create false information, nor did he besmirch the good name and character of others by merely expressing a point of view, a value judgment.

Criminal law professor Gao Mingxuan pointed out that publishing provocative speech on the Internet and gathering signatures to advocate overthrow of government is no longer freedom of speech, it's an act prohibited by criminal law. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of China pointed out that there are similar laws in many countries to prevent activities to advocate overthow of government, such as Code of Laws of the United States of America, or Treason Act 1351 of England.

Polish mural in Warsaw, reading "Solidarity with Liu Xiaobo"

Liu's detention was condemned worldwide by organisations and other countries. On 11 December 2008, the U.S. Department of State called for Liu's release, which was followed on 22 December 2008 by a similar request from a consortium of scholars, writers, lawyers and human rights advocates. Additionally, on 21 January 2009, 300 international writers, including Salman Rushdie, Margaret Atwood, Ha Jin and Jung Chang, called for Liu's release in a statement put out through PEN. In March 2009, the One World Film Festival awarded Liu Xiaobo the Homo Homini Award, organized by the People in Need foundation, for promoting freedom of speech, democratic principles and human rights.

In December 2009, the European Union and United States issued formal appeals calling for the unconditional release of Liu Xiaobo. China's government, responding to the international calls prior to the verdict, stated that other nations should "respect China's judicial sovereignty and not do things that will interfere in China's internal affairs".

Responding to the verdict, United Nations Human Rights Commissioner Navanethem Pillay expressed concern about the deterioration of political rights in China. German Chancellor Angela Merkel strongly criticized the verdict, stating "despite the great progress in other areas in the expression of views, I regret that the Chinese government still massively restricts press freedom." Canada and Switzerland also condemned the verdict. The Republic of China President Ma Ying-jeou called on Beijing to "tolerate dissent". On 6 January 2010, former Czech president Václav Havel joined with other communist-era dissidents at the Chinese Embassy in Prague to present a petition calling for Liu's release. On 22 January 2010, European Association for Chinese Studies sent an open letter to Hu Jintao on behalf of over 800 scholars from 36 countries calling for Liu's release.

On 18 January 2010, Liu was nominated for the 2010 Nobel Peace Prize by Václav Havel, the 14th Dalai Lama, André Glucksmann, Vartan Gregorian, Mike Moore, Karel Schwarzenberg, Desmond Tutu and Grigory Yavlinsky. China's Foreign Ministry spokesperson Ma Zhaoxu stated that awarding the Nobel Peace Prize to Liu would be "totally wrong". Geir Lundestad, a secretary of the Nobel Committee, stated the award would not be influenced by Beijing's opposition. On 25 September 2010, The New York Times reported that a petition in support of the Nobel nomination was being circulated in China.

On 14 September 2010, the Mayor of Reykjavík, Jón Gnarr, met on an unrelated matter with CPC Politburo member Liu Qi and demanded China set the dissident Liu Xiaobo free. Also that September Václav Havel, Dana Němcová and Václav Malý, leaders of Czechoslovakia's Velvet Revolution, published an open letter in the International Herald Tribune calling for the award to be given to Liu, while a petition began to circulate soon afterwards.

On 6 October 2010, the non-governmental organization Freedom Now, which serves as an international counsel to Liu Xiaobo as retained by his family, publicly released a letter from 30 members of the U.S. Congress to President Barack Obama, urging him to directly raise both Liu's case and that of fellow imprisoned dissident Gao Zhisheng to Chinese President Hu Jintao at the G-20 Summit in November 2010. The Republic of China's President Ma Ying-jiu congratulated Liu on winning the Nobel Prize and requested that the Chinese authorities improve their impression in the eyes of the world by respecting human rights, but did not call for his release from prison.

On 15 October 2010, the China News Service indicated that in 2008 Liu had received a financial endowment from the National Endowment for Democracy, which is "a Washington-based nonprofit funded largely by the US Congress".

In 2011, the WorldWideReading was dedicated to Liu Xiaobo; on 20 March, there were readings in more than 60 towns and cities on all continents and they were broadcast via radio stations. So far, the "Freedom for Liu Xiaobo" appeal has been supported by more than 700 writers from around the world, amongst them the Nobel Prize laureates John M. Coetzee, Nadine Gordimer, Herta Müller and Elfriede Jelinek, as well as Breyten Breytenbach, Eliot Weinberger, Salman Rushdie, Vikram Seth, Mario Vargas Llosa, Wolf Biermann and Dave Eggers.

On 20 March 2011, the international literature festival called for a worldwide reading for Liu Xiaobo. More than 700 authors from all continents signed the appeal and over 150 institutions took part in the event.

On 19 November 2013, his wife, Liu Xia, who was placed under house arrest shortly after Liu Xiaobo was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, filed an appeal for Liu Xiaobo's retrial. This move has been called "extraordinary" because the action could refocus the world's attention on China's human rights record.
According to her attorney, Mo Shaoping, Liu Xia visited her husband in Jinzhou Prison in Liaoning and gained his approval before filing this motion.

Nobel Peace Prize

Main article: 2010 Nobel Peace Prize

On 8 October 2010, the Nobel Committee awarded Liu the Nobel Peace Prize "for his long and non-violent struggle for fundamental human rights in China", saying that Liu had long been front-runner as the recipient of the prize. Liu's wife, Liu Xia, expressed gratitude on behalf of her husband to the Nobel Committee, Liu's proposers, and those who have been supporting him since 1989, including the Tiananmen Mothers—family members or representatives of those who were killed, or had disappeared, in the military crackdown of the protests of 4 June 1989. She said, "The prize should belong to all who signed Charter 08 and were jailed due to their support".

Liu Xia informed the laureate of his award during a visit to Jinzhou Prison on 9 October 2010, one day after the official announcement. She reported that Liu wept and dedicated the award to those who suffered as a result of the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, saying: "The award is first and foremost for the Tiananmen martyrs" After Ms. Liu returned home, she was put under house arrest and was watched by armed guards. She expressed the desire to attend the prize-giving in Norway in December, but was sceptical of her chances of being allowed to do so. Liu Xia wrote an open letter to 143 prominent figures, encouraging them to attend the award ceremony in Oslo.

China reacted negatively to the award, immediately censoring news about the announcement of the award in China, though later that day limited news of the award became available. Foreign news broadcasters including CNN and the BBC were immediately blocked, while heavy censorship was applied to personal communications. The Chinese Foreign Ministry denounced the award to Liu Xiaobo, saying that it "runs completely counter to the principle of the award and it is also a desecration of the Peace Prize". The Norwegian ambassador to the People's Republic of China was summoned by the Foreign Ministry on 8 October 2010 and presented with an official complaint about the granting of the Nobel Peace Prize to Liu. The Chinese government has called Liu Xiaobo a criminal and stated that he does not deserve the prize. Chinese dissident Wei Jingsheng, in his response to news of the award, criticized Liu by calling him "the accomplice of the Communist regime." As a result, nearly all large-scale commercial trades are limited, and their relation soured until after Liu Xiaobo's death in 2017, when talks begin. In October 2018, the Norwegian King Harald V visited Beijing and met with Chinese president Xi Jinping, symbolizing the recovery of China-Norway relations.

Global Times, part of the Chinese government-owned People's Daily, published a statement saying that Liu Xiaobo and his case had properly undergone "strict legal procedure", blaming Western regimes for sensationalizing the Liu Xiaobo story "in defiance of China's judicial sovereignty". The Chinese paper also rejected the view that Liu Xiaobo should be described as "China's Mandela", by stating: "Mandela was a Nobel Peace Prize laureate for leading African people to anti-apartheid victory through struggles ... however, awarding a Chinese prisoner who confronted authorities and was rejected by mainstream Chinese society derides China's judicial system ...  makes sure a society of 1.3 billion people runs smoothly."

Following the announcement of the Nobel Peace Prize, celebrations in China were either stopped or curtailed, and prominent intellectuals and other dissidents were detained, harassed or put under surveillance; Liu's wife, Liu Xia, was placed under house arrest and she was forbidden to talk to reporters even though no official charges were filed against her. Sixty-five countries with missions in Norway were all invited to the Nobel Prize ceremony, but fifteen of them declined the invitation, in some cases due to heavy lobbying by China. Besides China, these countries included Russia, Kazakhstan, Tunisia, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, Iraq, Iran, Vietnam, Venezuela, Egypt, Sudan, Cuba, and Morocco.

China also imposed travel restrictions on known dissidents ahead of the ceremony. A Chinese group announced that its answer to the Nobel Peace Prize, the Confucius Peace Prize, would be awarded to former Taiwanese Vice-President Lien Chan for the bridge of peace which he has been building between Taiwan and Mainland China. Lien Chan himself denied any knowledge of the $15,000 prize.

Medical parole and health

On 26 June 2017, it was reported that Liu had been granted medical parole after being diagnosed with terminal liver cancer in late May 2017. The Shenyang Justice Ministry released a statement on 5 July saying that the First Hospital of China Medical University, where Liu was being treated, has invited cancer experts from the United States, Germany and other nations to join its team of doctors. However, the statement did not mention which foreign doctors had been invited or whether or not any of them had responded. A statement one day later from the hospital said that Liu was admitted on 7 June. On 8 July, the hospital said that Joseph M. Herman of University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center and Markus Büchler of Heidelberg University had joined domestic experts for group consultation. The foreign doctors said that Liu had indicated that he wanted to be sent abroad for treatment. Acknowledging the risk that is involved when a patient is moved, they deemed that Liu was fit to travel abroad in order to receive the care which they were willing to provide him. However, the hospital said that the foreign doctors had confirmed that even they had no better treatment methods and also that the domestic doctors had done a very good job. On 10 July, the hospital said that Liu was in critical condition, and that he was suffering from an increasingly bloated stomach, an inflamed abdominal wall, falling blood pressure, faltering kidneys, growing cancer lesions, and that they were actively rescuing him, and were starting to use continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT). On 12 July, the hospital said that Liu was suffering from liver failure (Child–Pugh class C), kidney failure, respiratory failure, septic shock, blood clot, etc. and that they had communicated the necessity for tracheal intubation, but his family had rejected the procedure. The New York Times reported that Liu's family could not be independently reached for confirmation of his condition.

Death and funeral

Liu Xiaobo died on 13 July 2017 in Shenyang's First Hospital of China Medical University from liver cancer.

Censorship

Since his death, the fate of Liu Xiaobo has been compared by the media of the world to that of Carl von Ossietzky, Nobel Laureate in 1935 who also died as a prisoner of an authoritarian regime. Whilst Liu's death was widely reported in the Western media, it was mentioned only in the most perfunctory manner in the press inside mainland China. Censors deleted images or emojis of candles, or a simple "RIP"; searches on Sina Weibo regarding Liu's health returned the message: "According to relevant laws and policies, results for 'Liu Xiaobo' cannot be displayed". The Citizen Lab documented censorship of the death of Liu Xiaobo on WeChat and Weibo." They noted on 16 July censorship on WeChat of images related to Liu after his death, and found that even images were being blocked in one-to-one chat the first time as well as in group chat and WeChat Moments. Based on analyses of search term blocking on Weibo, the lab confirmed that a blanket ban on searches for Liu Xiaobo's name was still being applied. They said: "In fact, just his given name of Xiaobo is enough to trigger censorship in English and both Simplified and Traditional Chinese..."

On the early morning of 15 July 2017, a brief funeral service was held for Liu which Liu's body was cremated following a short mourning service. Liu's mourning ceremony and funeral were heavily stage-managed as friends and supporters had been warned that public funeral or memorial would not be tolerated.
All the questions international journalists have been asking about Liu failed to appear in official transcripts of news briefings by the Chinese foreign ministry.
 Germany, UK, France, the United States, Taiwan and the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein, called for the People's Republic of China to allow Liu Xiaobo's wife Liu Xia to travel and leave the country if she wishes.

Funeral

The ceremony was organised in a heavy-handed fashion in which Chinese government attempted to defend their treatment of Liu and his wife, although it was clear they and their family members were under perpetual surveillance. Although the funeral was attended by a brother of Ms. Liu and two of Mr. Liu's brothers, as well as their wives, none of Liu's friends could be identified from official photographs of the mourners.
A government spokesman said: "Liu Xia is free now,  grief-stricken and doesn't need to be disturbed" However, she has been out of sight since the video of Liu's sea burial.
The government claims that Liu had been cremated and his ashes scattered into the sea at the family's own request. His eldest brother, Liu Xiaoguang appeared at the same press briefing, thanked the Chinese Communist party and also the government "because everything they have done for our family shows a high level of humanity and personal care to us". According to Liu Xiaobo's biographer Yu Jie, Liu had ex-communicated his eldest brother after 4 June incident, calling him a "petty bureaucrat of the Communist Party". Yu further criticised Xiaoguang for usurping Liu Xia's position of next of kin and his "shamelessness", for attempting to grab a share of Liu's Nobel Prize money. The government of China has been accused by Liu's supporters of trying to erase any shrine or traces to Liu Xiaobo with a sea burial of his remains. Chinese human rights activists Hu Jia stated to the South China Morning Post that the hasty actions were "humiliating to a Nobel winner".

In Hong Kong, which still enjoys a diminishing range of freedoms that are non-existent in mainland China, activists organised the only large-scale commemoration for Liu on Chinese soil. A vigil outside the Beijing Liaison Office started on 10 July and continued until his death. Some newspapers in the city splashed Liu's portrait on their front pages to announce his death, while other pro-Communist journals relegated coverage to the inner pages. In the Legislative Council legislators of the Pro-democracy camp made seven attempts to table a debate on Liu, but president of the council, Andrew Leung, who is from the governing faction, rejected the attempts on the grounds that the matter did not have "urgent public importance according to 16.2 of the Rules of Procedure,  the wording of their petitions lacked neutrality".

Reactions

Sino-area

March in memory of Liu Xiaobo in Hong Kong

 People's Republic of China: The Ministry of Foreign Affairs' spokesman Geng Shuang chastised foreign officials' "improper comments on Liu Xiaobo's death of illness" and said that China had lodged "stern representations" with their countries. Geng also said on 14 July that "Conferring the prize to such a person goes against the purposes of this award. It's a blasphemy of the peace prize", according to the Voice of America. But an almost identical report from Voice of America Chinese also wrote that Geng's statement could not be found from the regular press briefing's Q&A transcript posted on the ministry's website.

Republic of China: President of the Republic of China Tsai Ing-wen pleaded with the Communist government to "show confidence in engaging in political reform so that the Chinese can enjoy the God-given rights of freedom and democracy ... The Chinese Dream is not supposed to be about military might. It should be about taking ideas like those from Liu Xiaobo into consideration. Only through democracy, in which every Chinese person has freedom and respect, can China truly become a proud and important country." In his tribute on Facebook, former ROC President and leader of the Kuomintang Ma Ying-jeou said the Chinese dream should develop proportionally on freedom and human rights. Mayor of Taipei Ko Wen-je expressed condolences.

Tibetan Government in Exile: The 14th Dalai Lama, who himself is the 1989 Nobel Peace Prize winner, the Speaker of the Tibetan Parliament-in-Exile, Khenpo Sonam Tenphel, and Prime Minister of the Tibetan Government-in-Exile, Lobsang Sangay mourned the death of Liu. The Dalai Lama issued the following short statement on 14 July 2017, "I am deeply saddened to learn that fellow Nobel Laureate Liu Xiaobo has passed away while undergoing a lengthy prison sentence. I offer my prayers and condolences to his wife, Liu Xia and to other members of his family. Although he is no longer living, the rest of us can best pay honor to Liu Xiaobo by carrying forward the principles he has long embodied, which would lead to a more harmonious, stable and prosperous China. It is my belief that Nobel Laureate Liu Xiaobo's unceasing efforts in the cause of freedom will bear fruit before long."

International

 States

 France: President Emmanuel Macron, who hosted a press conference for visiting US President Trump, later paid tribute to Dr Liu in a tweet, praising him as "a freedom fighter". French Foreign Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian expressed condolences as well.

Germany: Chancellor Angela Merkel described Liu Xiaobo as a "courageous fighter for civil rights and freedom of expression". Foreign Minister Sigmar Gabriel said that "China now has the responsibility to quickly, transparently and plausibly answer the question of whether the cancer could not have been identified much earlier."

Japan: Both the Minister of Foreign affairs Fumio Kishida and Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga expressed condolences.

Norway: Prime Minister of Norway Erna Solberg said that "It is with deep grief that I received the news of Liu Xiaobo's passing. Liu Xiaobo was for decades a central voice for human rights and China's further development." Thorbjørn Jagland, a member and former chairman of the Norwegian Nobel Committee, and a former Prime Minister of Norway, compared Liu Xiaobo to Carl von Ossietzky, noting that he became the second Nobel Prize laureate who was prevented from receiving the prize because he died in prison. An official statement by the Norwegian Nobel Committee blamed the Chinese communist regime for Liu Xiaobo's death and condemned the erosion of human rights as a universal value; on behalf of the committee, chairwoman Reiss-Andersen said that "Liu Xiaobo had contributed to the fraternity of peoples through his non-violent resistance against the oppressive actions of the Communist regime in China" and that "the Chinese Government bears a heavy responsibility for his premature death". Reiss-Andersen said Liu Xiaobo will remain "a powerful symbol for all who fight for freedom, democracy and a better world". She also lamented the "sad and disturbing fact that the representatives of the free world, who themselves hold democracy and human rights in high regard, are less willing to stand up for those rights for the benefit of others."

United Kingdom: Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson called Liu a "lifelong campaigner for democracy, human rights and peace", and said that his death was a huge loss. He further stated that "Liu Xiaobo should have been allowed to choose his own medical treatment overseas" and called for the Chinese authorities "to lift all restrictions" on Liu's widow.

United States: Although Donald Trump did not offer or get asked over Dr. Liu's death at a press conference with French President Emmanuel Macron, his press secretary did issue a condolence statement. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said that "Mr Liu dedicated his life to the betterment of his country and humankind, and to the pursuit of justice and liberty," and urged Beijing to free Liu's widow. U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley and U.S. Ambassador to China Terry Branstad both expressed condolences.

The Congressional-Executive Commission on China, whose commissioners come from both the House of Representatives and Senate, issued a bipartisan statement. The United States House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights and International Organizations held a hearing on Liu and his death (entitled "The Tragic Case of Liu Xiaobo"). Nancy Pelosi, the House Minority Leader, was saddened by the news of Liu's passing. Back on 18 May, both Republican Senator Ted Cruz and Representative Mark Meadows had re-introduced bills to resume their push to rename the address of Embassy of China in Washington, D.C. as "1 Liu Xiaobo Plaza." Bob Fu, a Chinese American human rights activist and pastor, told The Texas Tribune that he is "definitely more optimistic" about Cruz's bill getting enacted with President Trump in office. Later Senator Marco Rubio write a letter to sent Liu Xia, Liu Xiaobo's widow. Senator John McCain said that "this is only the latest example of Communist China's assault on human rights, democracy, and freedom."

Former President George W. Bush and First Lady Laura Bush also expressed condolences.

Organizations

 European Union: President of the European Commission Jean-Claude Juncker and President of the European Council Donald Tusk said in a joint statement that they had learned of Liu's death "with deep sadness" and that "We appeal to the Chinese authorities to allow his wife, Ms Liu Xia and his family to bury Liu Xiaobo at a place and in a manner of their choosing, and to allow them to grieve in peace".

United Nations: UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein said, "The human rights movement in China and across the world has lost a principled champion who devoted his life to defending and promoting human rights, peacefully and consistently, and who was jailed for standing up for his beliefs. Liu Xiaobo was the true embodiment of the democratic, non-violent ideals he so ardently advocated."

Major works

Criticism of the Choice: Dialogues with LI Zehou. Shanghai People's Publishing House. 1987.

Criticism of the Choice: Dialogues with Leading Thinker LI Zehou. Shanghai People's Publishing House. 1989.

Aesthetics and Human Freedom. Beijing Normal University Press. 1988.

Going Naked Toward God. Time Literature and Art Publishing House. 1989.

The Fog of Metaphysics. Shanghai People's Publishing House. 1989.

Mysteries of Thought and Dreams of Mankind, 2 volumes. Strom & Stress Publishing Company. 1989–1990.

Contemporary Politics and Intellectuals of China. Tangshan Publishing Company, Taiwan. 1990.

Criticism on Contemporary Chinese Intellectuals (Japanese Translation). Tokuma Bookstore, Tokyo. 1992.

The Monologues of a Doomsday's Survivor. China Times Publishing Company, Taiwan. 1993.

Selected Poems of Liu Xiaobo and Liu Xia. Xiafei'er International Press, Hong Kong. 2000.

Under pen name Lao Xia and co-authored with Wang Shuo (2000). A Belle Gave me Knockout Drug. Changjiang Literary Press.

A Nation That Lies to Conscience. Jie-jou Publishing Company, Taiwan. 2002.

Civil Awakening—The Dawn of a Free China. Laogai Research Foundation. 2005.

A Single Blade and Toxic Sword: Critique on Contemporary Chinese Nationalism. Broad Press Inc, Sunnyvale. 2006.

Falling of A Great Power: Memorandum to China. Yunchen Culture. October 2009.

From TianAnMen Incident to Charter 08 (in Japanese ): Memorandum to China. Fujiwara Bookstore, Tokyo. December 2009.

No Enemies, No Hatred. The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. 2012.

June Fourth Elegies: Poems translated from the Chinese by Jeffrey Yang With a Foreword by His Holiness the Dalai Lama Bilingual Edition. Graywolf Press. 2012.

Awards and honors

Hellman-Hammett Grant (1990, 1996)

China Foundation on Democracy Education for Outstanding Democratic Activist (2003)

Fondation de France Prize for defender of press freedom (2004)

Hong Kong Human Rights Press Awards (2004, 2005, 2006)

Excellent Award (2004) for an article Corrupted News is not News, published on Open Magazine, January 2004 issue

Grand Prize (2005) for an article Paradise of the Powerful, Hell of the Vulnerable on Open Magazine, September 2004 issue

Excellent Award (2006) for The Causes and Ending of Shanwei Bloodshed on Open Magazine, January 2006

Asia-Pacific Human Rights Foundation (Australia) Courage of Conscience Award (2007)

People in Need (Czech) Homo Homini Award (2009)

PEN/Barbara Goldsmith Freedom to Write Award (2009)

Independent Federation of Chinese Students and Scholars (USA) Free Spirit Award (2009)

German PEN Hermann Kesten Medal (2010)

Nobel Peace Prize (2010)

Giuseppe Motta Medal (2010)

Honorary member of German, American, Portuguese, Czech and Sydney PEN Centers and Honorary President of Independent Chinese PEN Center.

See also

Carl von Ossietzky

Charter 08

Human rights in the People's Republic of China

List of Chinese dissidents

List of Chinese Nobel laureates

Weiquan movement

References

^ Freeland, Chrystia (13 July 2017). "Statement by Minister of Foreign Affairs following death of Liu Xiaobo" (Press release). Global Affairs Canada.

^ Biography of Liu Xiaobo. Encyclopædia Britannica. 2010.

^ Frances Romero, Top 10 Political Prisoners, Time, 15 November 2010.

^ Mark McDonald, An inside look at China's most famous political prisoner, The New York Times, 23 July 2012.

^ Congressional-Executive Commission on China, Political Prisoner Database:Liu Xiaobo Archived 16 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine.

^ "Liu Xiaobo: Jailed Chinese dissident has terminal cancer". BBC News. 26 June 2017.

^ Gracie, Carrie (13 July 2017). "Liu Xiaobo: The man China couldn't erase". BBC News. Retrieved 1 March 2018.

^ Benjamin Kang Lim, China's top dissident arrested for subversion, Reuters, 24 June 2009.

^ a b 刘晓波因涉嫌煽动颠覆国家政权罪被依法逮捕 . China Review News (in Chinese). 24 June 2009.

^ a b c d Canghai  刘晓波案闪电移送法院 律师两次前往未能会见  (in Chinese). Canyu . 11 December 2009.

^ a b c d e Beijing No. 1 Intermediate Court, Criminal Verdict no. (2009) yi zhong xing chu zi 3901, unofficial English translation in Human Rights in China, "International Community Speaks Out on Liu Xiaobo Verdict Archived 4 December 2012 at Archive.today," 30 December 2009.

^ Dwyer Arce (10 December 2010). "China dissident Liu Xiaobo awarded Nobel Peace Prize in absentia". JURIST – Paper Chase.

^ a b The Nobel Peace Prize 2010 – Prize Announcement, Nobel Prize, 8 October 2010

^ a b 劉曉波獲諾貝爾和平獎 , RTHK (in Chinese), 8 October 2010, archived from the original on 11 October 2010

^ McKinnon, Mark. "Liu Xiaobo could win the Nobel Peace Prize, and he’d be the last to know". The Globe and Mail. 7 October 2010. 'Ms. Liu said her husband had been told by his lawyer during a recent visit that he had been nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize, but he would be shocked if he won, she said. "I think he would definitely find it hard to believe. He never thought of being nominated, he never mentioned any awards. For so many years, he has been calling for people to back the Tiananmen Mothers (a support group formed by parents of students killed in the 1989 demonstrations).."'

^ Lovell, Julia (9 October 2010). "Beijing values the Nobels. That's why this hurts". The Independent. UK. Retrieved 9 October 2010.

^ Wachter, Paul (18 November 2010). "Liu Xiaobo wasn't the First Nobel Laureate Barred From Accepting His Prize" Archived 21 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine. AOL News

^ Christophe Neff (17 July 2017). "Liu Xiaobo – Carl von Ossietzky" (in French). Blogs le Monde on LeMonde.fr.

^ a b "Norwegian Nobel Committee mourns Liu Xiaobo, statement by Chair Berit Reiss-Andersen". The Nobel Peace Prize.

^ "Verdict Against Liu Xiaobo". International PEN. Archived from the original on 8 March 2012. Retrieved 11 January 2012.

^ a b 【劉曉波逝世】一門五兄弟 父同因肝病去世. Ming Pao (in Chinese). 13 July 2017. Retrieved 17 July 2017.

^ a b c Yu Jie (2012). 我無罪: 劉曉波傳 (in Chinese). 時報文化. ISBN 9789571356280. OCLC 820002390.

^ a b 劉曉波好友 怒批劉曉光無恥 (in Chinese). Retrieved 17 July 2017.

^ 新时代仍需要抗联精神(December 2004 )——杨念杨靖宇将军诞辰100周年特别报道 (in Chinese). Jilin Provincial Library. Archived from the original on 2 June 2017. Retrieved 17 July 2017.

^ a b 刘晓暄呼吁中国政府释放其兄刘晓波 (in Chinese). Deutsche Welle. 15 November 2010. Retrieved 17 July 2017.

^ 刘晓暄教授-材料与能源学院. Guangdong University of Technology (in Chinese). Retrieved 17 July 2017.

^ 侯晓敏 (25 July 2016). 刘晓暄：高分子光化学的传承与创新. 科技日报 (in Chinese). p. 7. Retrieved 17 July 2017.

^ "Liu Xiaobo, Chinese Dissident Who Won Nobel While Jailed, Dies at 61". The New York Times. 13 July 2017.

^ a b "Liu Xiaobo – the quiet, determined teller of China's inconvenient truths". South China Morning Post. 13 July 2017.

^ 赤子心诗社 (in Chinese). Baidu. 22 April 2009.

^ "5 things you need to know about Liu Xiaobo". pbs.org. 10 December 2010.

^ Huang, Cary; Mai, Jun (14 July 2017). "Liu Xiaobo – the quiet, determined teller of China's inconvenient truths". South China Morning Post. Retrieved 20 December 2017.

^ a b c 貝嶺 (17 June 2010). 別無選擇—記1989年前後的劉曉波. United Daily News (in Chinese). Taiwan.

^ Xiaobing, Li (2016). Modern China. ABC-CLIO. p. 106. ISBN 978-1-61069-625-8.

^ Yu, Shicun (余世存) (2 June 2008). 北京当代汉语研究所2008年公告 (in Chinese). Chinese Pen. Archived from the original on 18 July 2011. Cite journal requires |journal= (help)

^ Kristof, Nicholas. "Liu Xiaobo, We Miss You". The New York Times. Retrieved 13 July 2017.

^ Branigan, Tania. "Liu Xiaobo obituary". The Guardian. Retrieved 13 July 2017.

^ "Factbox: Who is Liu Xiaobo?". Reuters. 9 December 2010.

^ "Jailed Chinese Nobel Peace laureate Liu Xiaobo released after diagnosis of terminal cancer". The Daily Telegraph. 26 June 2017.

^ a b Liu Xiaobo (27 November 1988). 文壇「黑馬」劉曉波 . Open Magazine (in Chinese).

^ a b c Liu Xiaobo (19 December 2006). 我與《開放》結緣十九年 . Open Magazine (in Chinese).

^ name=nybooks20120205>Leys, Simon (9 February 2012). "He Told the Truth About China’s Tyranny". The New York Review of Books.

^ Leys, Simon (9 February 2012). "He Told the Truth About China’s Tyranny". The New York Review of Books.

^ a b Caraus, Tamara; Parvu, Camil Alexandru. Cosmopolitanism and the Legacies of Dissent. pp. 69–70.

^ Letter from Liu Xiaobo to Liao Yiwu. Human Rights in China.

^ Liu, Xiabo (2012). No Enemies, No Hatred. Harvard University Press. p. 75.

^ Liu, Xiabo (2012). No Enemies, No Hatred. Harvard University Press. p. 83.

^ McKey, Robert (8 October 2010). Jailed Chinese Dissident's 'Final Statement', The New York Times.

^ a b Buckley, Chris. "Liu Xiaobo, Chinese Dissident Who Won Nobel While Jailed, Dies at 61". The New York Times. Retrieved 13 July 2017.

^ Johnson, Ian. "China's 'Fault Lines': Yu Jie on His New Biography of Liu Xiaobo". The New York Review of Books. Retrieved 13 July 2017.

^ Sautman, Barry; Yan, Hairong. "Do supporters of Nobel winner Liu Xiaobo really know what he stands for?". The Guardian. Retrieved 13 July 2017.

^ a b Liu, Xiaobo. 伊战与美国大选 . Independent Chinese Pen Center (in Chinese). Retrieved 13 July 2017.

^ a b Liu Xiaobo (11 April 2004). 刘晓波：美英自由联盟必胜  (in Chinese). Boxun.

^ Xiaobo, Liu. "The Prison Abuse Scandal and Iraq's Status". Independent Chinese Pen Center. Retrieved 13 July 2017.

^ Schultz, Colin (9 September 2013). "Obama Isn't the First Peace Prize Laureate to Support a War". Smithsonian Magazine. Retrieved 2 February 2020. Liu warmly praised George Bush for his war effort against Iraq and condemned Democratic party candidate John Kerry for not sufficiently supporting the US’s wars.

^ Sautman, Barry; Yan, Hairong (15 December 2010). "Do supporters of Nobel winner Liu Xiaobo really know what he stands for?". The Guardian. Retrieved 3 November 2011.

^ Geremie R. Barmé, "Confession, Redemption and Death: Liu Xiaobo and the Protest Movement of 1989", in George Hicks (ed.), The Broken Mirror: China After Tiananmen, London: Longmans, 1990, pp. 52–99

^ K. Mok, Intellectuals and the State in Post-Mao China, p. 167, 1998

^ Jean-Philippe Béja, Fu Hualing, Eva Pils, Liu Xiaobo, Charter 08 and the Challenges of Political Reform in China, p. 25 (2012)

^ 《零八憲章》惹怒中共 劉曉波遭重判11年. Apple Daily (in Chinese). 13 July 2017.

^ Wang Ming, "A Citizen's Declaration on Freedom of Speech," China Rights Forum (spring 1997).

^ Branigan, Tania (27 February 2010). "My dear husband Liu Xiaobo, the writer China has put behind bars". The Guardian.

^ "Wife of Nobel Peace Prize winner talks about daily struggle". Deutsche Welle. 8 October 2010.

^ a b c d 警車守門外多年被軟禁. Apple Daily (in Chinese). Hong Kong. 9 October 2010.

^ Watts, Jonathan (25 December 2009). "Chinese human rights activist Liu Xiaobo sentenced to 11 years in jail". The Guardian.

^ Liu Xiaobo. 赵紫阳亡灵:不准悼念和禁忌松动  (in Chinese). Independent Chinese Pen Center. Archived from the original on 13 October 2010. Retrieved 10 October 2010.

^ Baculinao, Eric and Gu, Bo (8 October 2010)In China, citizens find ways to learn of Nobel prize, NBC News.

^ Link, Perry. "Charter 08 Translated from the Chinese by Perry Link The following text of Charter 08, signed by hundreds of Chinese intellectuals and translated and introduced by Perry Link, Professor of Chinese Literature at the University of California, Riverside". The New York Review of Books. Retrieved 10 December 2008.

^ Reporters Without Borders, "Fondation de France Prize: Liu Xiaobo Receives Prize for Defence of Press Freedom," 21 December 2004.

^ 和平獎得主劉曉波小傳. Ming Pao (in Chinese). Hong Kong. 8 October 2010.

^ Ramzy, Austin (8 October 2010). "Chinese Dissident Liu Xiaobo Wins Nobel Peace Prize". Time. Retrieved 9 October 2010.

^ Link, Perry. "Charter 08 Translated from Chinese by Perry Link The following text of Charter 08, signed by hundreds of Chinese intellectuals and translated and introduced by Perry Link, Professor of Chinese Literature at the University of California, Riverside". The New York Review of Books. Retrieved 10 December 2008.

^ a b "China Detains Dissidents ahead of Human Rights Day," Reuters, 9 December 2008; "Report: Chinese Police Detain Political Critic," Associated Press, 9 December 2008.

^ 零八宪章签署者已过8600名，第十四批签名人正式名单  (in Chinese). Boxun. 4 May 2009.

^ 著名学者张祖桦、刘晓波'失踪'. Boxun (in Chinese). 9 December 2008.

^ Macartney, Jane (8 December 2009). "Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo begins second year of detention without charge". The Times. London.

^ a b "Writers Call for China Dissident's Release," Reuters, 9 December 2008.

^ 中华人民共和国刑法  (in Chinese).

^ Human Rights Watch, "China: Liu Xiaobo's Trial a Travesty of Justice," 21 December 2009.

^ Michael Anti, "Liu Xiaobo's brother-in-law says the trial ends without result. Waiting for lawyer coming out," 23 December 2009.

^ Chinese angered by 'interference' in dissident trial BBC.

^ Cara Anna, "Diplomats Kept Away from China Dissident's Trial," The Associated Press, 23 December 2009. Archived 28 December 2009 at the Wayback Machine

^ Liu Xiaobo – Appell Archived 12 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine

^ Pomfret, John (8 October 2010). China's Liu Xiaobo wins Nobel Peace Prize, The Washington Post; pub:AARP. Archived 11 February 2011 at the Wayback Machine

^ a b Liu Xiaobo (9 February 2010) Guilty of 'crime of speaking', South China Morning Post.

^ 所谓"因言获罪"是对刘晓波案判决的误读——刑法学专家谈刘晓波案与言论自由 (in Chinese). Embassy of the People's Republic of China in the Kingdom of Norway. 26 October 2010.

^ 外交部就美日军演、六方会谈团长紧急磋商等答问 (in Chinese). Government of the People's Republic of China.

^ Sean McCormack, Sean McCormack (11 December 2008). "Harassment of Chinese Signatories to Charter 08 Press Statement Sean McCormack (spokesman)". U.S. Department of State. Retrieved 10 December 2008.

^ "Letter from the Consortium for the Release of Liu Xiaobo to China's President Hu Jintao," Human Rights Watch. 22 December 2008.

^ "One World Homo Homini award goes to Chinese dissident". Aktualne.cz. 12 March 2009. Retrieved 3 December 2009.

^ Grajewski, Marcin (14 December 2009), U.S., EU urge China to release prominent dissident, Reuters

^ "Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo jailed for subversion". BBC World News. 25 December 2009. Retrieved 25 December 2009.

^ "Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Jiang Yu's Regular Press Conference on 24 December 2009". Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the People's Republic of China. 25 December 2009.

^ "Imprisonment of Chinese dissident deeply concerns UN human rights chief". United Nations News Service. 25 December 2009.

^ Illmer, Andreas, ed. (25 December 2009), Rights groups, West blast China over sentence for leading dissident, Deutsche Welle

^ "Canada 'deplores' sentencing of Chinese dissident". Agence France-Presse. 26 December 2009.

^ "Switzerland joins protests against China". Swissinfo. 26 December 2009.

^ "Ma asks Beijing to tolerate dissidents". Taiwan News. Central News Agency. 27 December 2009.

^ Anderlini, Jamil (15 January 2010). "The Chinese dissident's 'unknown visitors'". Financial Times.

^ "OPEN LETTER TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA" (PDF). European Association for Chinese Studies. 22 January 2010.

^ "A Chinese Champion of Peace and Freedom". Project Syndicate. 18 January 2010.

^ a b "China opposes Nobel for jailed dissident, lawmakers back Liu Xiabo". phayul.com. 6 February 2010.

^ a b "Petition Urges Nobel for Jailed Chinese Writer" article by Andrew Jacobs in The New York Times 25 September 2010. Retrieved 25 September 2010.

^ "A Nobel Prize for a Chinese Dissident". The New York Times. 20 September 2010.

^ "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 June 2011. Retrieved 7 October 2010.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link)

^ "Taiwan's Ma congratulates Nobel laureate Liu". Associated Press. 9 October 2010.

^ 网友曝料：刘晓波在中国坐牢，领美国的工资(图) (in Chinese). chinanews.com. Retrieved 14 July 2017.

^ Luhn, Alec (28 July 2015). "National Endowment for Democracy is first 'undesirable' NGO banned in Russia". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 14 July 2017.

^ "The ilb appealed for a worldwide reading on March 20th 2012 for Liu Xiaobo". Berlin International Literature Festival.

^ a b "Wife of jailed Chinese Nobel Laureate appeals for his retrial". Reuters. 19 November 2013.

^ "The Nobel Peace Prize 2010". Nobelprize.org. Retrieved 8 October 2010.

^ "Nobel Peace Prize awarded to China dissident Liu Xiaobo". BBC News. 8 October 2010. Retrieved 8 October 2010.

^ Huang, Cary (9 October 2010). "Liu Xiaobo wins Nobel Peace Prize". South China Morning Post.

^ Schiller, Bill (8 October 2010). "China tries to block news of dissident's Nobel prize". Toronto Star. Retrieved 8 October 2010.

^ a b "Wife visits jailed Chinese Nobel winner Liu Xiaobo". BBC News. 10 October 2010. Retrieved 10 October 2010.

^ a b 劉曉波：這個獎」是給天安門亡靈的「 . BBC News (in Chinese). 10 October 2010. Retrieved 6 September 2011.

^ a b Staff reporters (11 October 2010). "Tearful Liu dedicates prize to martyrs". South China Morning Post.

^ Chong, Dennis (13 October 2010). "Let me pick up Nobel Peace Prize, pleads Liu's wife". The Standard.

^ Criscione, Valeria (27 October 2010). "Was China behind cyber attack on Nobel Peace Prize website?". The Christian Science Monitor. Retrieved 10 November 2010.

^ "China censors Nobel award". Bangkok Post. 8 October 2010.

^ Eric Baculinao and Bo Gu, "In China, citizens find ways to learn of Nobel prize" , NBC News, 8 October 2010.

^ Victor Mair, "Liu Xiaobo", Language Log, 10 October 2010.

^ "China Angered By Selection of Dissident Liu Xiaobo for Nobel Peace Prize". ABC News. 8 October 2010. Retrieved 8 October 2010.

^ Vehaskari, Aira Katariina (8 October 2010). "Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo wins Nobel Peace Prize". Agence France-Presse. Retrieved 8 October 2010.

^ 外交部发言人马朝旭答记者问 (in Chinese). Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of China. 8 October 2010. Retrieved 8 October 2010.

^ "Awarding Liu Xiaobo Nobel peace prize may harm China-Norway relations, says FM spokesman". Xinhua News Agency. 8 October 2010.

^ 中國召喚挪威大使抗議諾獎. Ming Pao (in Chinese). Hong Kong. Reuters. Retrieved 8 October 2010.

^ Wei Jingsheng (15 October 2010). "What Today's Nobel Peace Prize Offers?". chinaaffairs.org. Retrieved 21 December 2010.

^ "China, Norway vow to write new chapter in bilateral ties – Xinhua | English.news.cn". www.xinhuanet.com. Retrieved 22 February 2019.

^ a b "Chinese paper rejects comparison between Mandela and Nobel laureate Liu". Reuters. 11 December 2013.

^ Jacobs, Andrew (9 October 2010). "China, Angered by Peace Prize, Blocks Celebration". The New York Times. Retrieved 9 October 2010.

^ Bei Feng (11 October 2010). "Viewing the Liu Xiaobo response through Twitter" Archived 27 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine, China Media Project of the University of Hong Kong.

^ "Chinese Nobel prize winner's wife detained". CNN. 11 October 2010. Retrieved 11 October 2010.

^ "Chinese Nobel Winner's Wife Detained". Slashdot. 10 October 2010. Retrieved 11 October 2010.

^ "Embassies represented at the Nobel Peace Prize Ceremony on December 10". The Norwegian Nobel Institute. 7 December 2010. Archived from the original on 12 December 2010. Retrieved 14 December 2010.

^ "Chinese Nobel boycott gains support". Al Jazeera. 7 December 2010. Archived from the original on 10 December 2010. Retrieved 11 December 2010.

^ Blanchard, Ben (8 December 2010). "China to award own peace prize ahead of Nobel award". Reuters. Retrieved 11 December 2010.

^ "China to award own peace prize ahead of Nobel award". Focus Taiwan. 8 December 2010. Retrieved 11 December 2010.

^ "Chinese group to award rival 'peace prize'". Focus Taiwan. 8 December 2010. Retrieved 11 December 2010.

^ Buckley, Chris; Ramzy, Austin (26 June 2017). "Liu Xiaobo, Chinese Nobel Laureate, Leaves Prison for Cancer Care". The New York Times. Retrieved 12 July 2017.

^ Ramzy, Austin. "Chinese Hospital Invites Cancer Experts to Help Treat Nobel Laureate". The New York Times. Retrieved 5 July 2017.

^ "Liu Xiaobo Status Update". First Hospital of China Medical University. 6 July 2017. Retrieved 12 July 2017.

^ "Professor of Radiation Oncology". The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center. Retrieved 12 July 2017.

^ "Professor of Surgery and Chairman, Department of Surgery". University of Heidelberg. Retrieved 12 July 2017.

^ "American & Germany Experts RSVP'd Invitation to Join National Experts Group to Consult on Liu Xiaobo's Illness". First Hospital of China Medical University. 8 July 2017. Retrieved 12 July 2017.

^ Hernandez, Javier C.; Buckley, Chris (9 July 2017). "Doctors Say Chinese Dissident Is Fit to Travel for Cancer Treatment". The New York Times. Retrieved 12 July 2017.

^ "American & German Experts Said that Liu Xiaobo Would Not Receive Better Treatment Abroad". First Hospital of China Medical University. 8 July 2017. Retrieved 12 July 2017.

^ Buckley, Chris (10 July 2017). "Chinese Doctors Say Nobel Laureate Is in Critical Condition". The New York Times. Retrieved 12 July 2017.

^ "Liu Xiaobo Illness Status Update". First Hospital of China Medical University. 10 July 2017. Retrieved 12 July 2017.

^ "Liu Xiaobo Illness Status Update". First Hospital of China Medical University. 12 July 2017. Retrieved 12 July 2017.

^ Ramzy, Austin (12 July 2017). "Liu Xiaobo, Nobel Laureate, Is Said to Be Suffering from Organ Failure". The New York Times. Retrieved 12 July 2017.

^ "Liu Xiaobo Died After Ineffective Rescue Measures". The First Hospital of China Medical University. Retrieved 13 July 2017.

^ Christophe Neff (17 July 2017). "Liu Xiaobo – Carl von Ossietzky". Le Monde (in French).

^ a b c d "World leaders call for release of Liu Xiaobo's widow". South China Morning Post.

^ a b c Hioe, Brian (17 July 2017). "Handling of Liu Xiaobo's Funeral Shows That Not Even The Dead Are Safe in China".

^ a b c "Ottawa's despicable display in China". Maclean's. Canada. 14 July 2017.

^ a b "Remembering Liu Xiaobo: Analyzing censorship of the death of Liu Xiaobo on WeChat and Weibo". The Citizen Lab. 17 July 2017. Archived from the original on 17 July 2017.CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)

^ a b c "Liu Xiaobo cremated in 'private ceremony', amid fears for wife's safety". The Guardian. 15 July 2017.

^ "Chinese censors scrub Liu Xiaobo tributes online". South China Morning Post.

^ a b c d e "Liu Xiaobo's ashes scattered at sea after 'hasty' cremation". South China Morning Post.

^ a b Lahiri, Tripti. "Only one city in China is getting to mourn Liu Xiaobo".

^ "Liu Xiaobo: China's most prominent dissident dies". BBC. 13 July 2017.

^ Buckley, Chris (13 July 2017). "Liu Xiaobo, Chinese Dissident Who Won Nobel While Jailed, Dies at 61". The New York Times.

^ a b "Liu Xiaobo: China rejects foreign criticism over dissident's death". BBC. 14 July 2017.

^ Buckley, Chris (15 July 2017). "Liu Xiaobo, Chinese Dissident and Nobel Laureate, Is Cremated". The New York Times.

^ a b "China cremates body of jailed Nobel laureate Liu Xiaobo". ABC News. Archived from the original on 22 July 2017.

^ "Worldwide memorials held to remember Liu Xiaobo". South China Morning Post.

^ 劉曉波哥哥被批企圖分諾貝爾獎金 – 萬維讀者網. news.creaders.net (in Chinese). Retrieved 17 July 2017.

^ "Family scatters ashes of Chinese Nobel laureate Liu Xiaobo into the sea". Los Angeles Times. Associated Press. 15 July 2017. Retrieved 25 November 2019.

^ "Anger as ashes of Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo are buried at sea in 'disgusting' funeral".

^ "Marchers pay respect to Liu Xiaobo". RTHK.

^ "Thousands march in Hong Kong to remember Liu Xiaobo". Al Jazeera.

^ Haas, Benjamin (15 July 2017). "Hong Kong vigil for Liu Xiaobo sends powerful message to Beijing". The Guardian.

^ "Legco chief rebuffs attempts to discuss Liu Xiaobo – RTHK".

^ Lai, Catherine (13 July 2017). "President of Hong Kong legislature refuses to let lawmakers discuss Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo". Hong Kong Free Press.

^ "China: Liu's Nobel Peace Prize was 'Blasphemy'". Voice of America. 14 July 2017. Retrieved 14 July 2017.

^ 中国外交部：诺贝尔和平奖授予刘晓波是"亵渎". Voice of America Chinese (in Chinese). 14 July 2017. Retrieved 14 July 2017.

^ Ko, Yu-how; Shen, Pei-yao; Chung, Jake. "Taiwanese mourn Nobel laureate's passing". Taipei Times. Retrieved 14 July 2017.

^ 张永泰. 台湾现任及前任总统透过脸书哀悼刘晓波病逝 (in Chinese).

^ "Speaker of Tibetan Parliament Offers Condolences on the demise of Nobel Laureate Liu Xiaobo". Central Tibetan Administration. 13 July 2017.

^ "CTA President Offers Condolence over Liu Xiaobo's Death, says He is Heartbroken". Central Tibetan Administration. 13 July 2017. Archived from the original on 13 July 2017.CS1 maint: BOT: original-url status unknown (link)

^ Choesang, Yeshe (14 July 2017). "Leaders of Tibet join global community to mourn Liu Xiaobo's death". Tibet Post. Retrieved 14 July 2017.

^ "His Holiness the Dalai Lama Deeply Saddened by Liu Xiaobo's Passing…". The 14th Dalai Lama. 18 July 2017.

^ "Trump, Macron avoid criticism of China's Xi". Agence France-Presse. Retrieved 16 July 2017.

^ 中国异议人士刘晓波病逝 国际社会强烈反应 (in Chinese). BBC. 13 July 2017.

^ "Merkel hails China's Liu as a courageous civil rights fighter". Reuters. 13 July 2017.

^ 歌篮. 日本政府与传媒舆论对刘晓波逝世反应显温差 (in Chinese). Voice of America.

^ "Press Conference by Foreign Minister Fumio Kishida: The Passing of Mr. Liu Xiaobo". Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan. Retrieved 18 July 2017.

^ Suga, Yoshihide. "Press Conference by the Chief Cabinet Secretary". Prime Minister of Japan and His Cabinet. Retrieved 18 July 2017.

^ "West mourns Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo, criticizes Beijing". Reuters. 13 July 2017.

^ "Nobelprisvinner Liu Xiaobo er død" (in Norwegian).

^ "Foreign Secretary statement on Liu Xiaobo" (Press release). 13 July 2017.

^ "Statement from the Press Secretary on the Death of Liu Xiaobo" (Press release). White House Office of the Press Secretary. 13 July 2017.

^ 川普： 获悉刘晓波去世深感悲伤 (in Chinese). Voice of America Chinese.

^ a b "World reacts with praise, sadness to Liu Xiaobo's death". 14 July 2017.

^ Tillerson, Rex W. (13 July 2017). "On the Passing of Liu Xiaobo". U.S. Department of State. Retrieved 14 July 2017.

^ Haley, Nikki (13 July 2017). "Ambassador Nikki Haley's Statement on the Passing of Liu Xiaobo". US Embassy & Consulates in China. Retrieved 16 July 2017.

^ An, Hua (安华). 美国驻联合国大使黑利就刘晓波去世发表声明 (in Chinese). Voice of America.

^ Branstad, Terry (13 July 2017). "Statement from U.S. Ambassador Branstad on the passing of Liu Xiaobo". Retrieved 16 July 2017.

^ 刘晓波病逝引发国际社会强烈反响 (in Chinese). Radio Free Asia.

^ "CECC Commissioners Issue Statements on the Death of Nobel Laureate Liu Xiaobo". The Congressional-Executive Commission on China. 13 July 2017. Retrieved 16 July 2017.

^ The Tragic Case of Liu Xiaobo, Hearing of the United States House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health, Global Human Rights and International Organizations (14 July 2017).

^ The Latest: US Congress holds hearing on Liu Xiaobo’s life, Associated Press (14 July 2017).

^ "Transcript of Pelosi Press Conference Today". Congresswoman Nancy Pelosi Serving California's 12th District. 13 July 2017. Retrieved 19 July 2017.

^ Cruz, Ted. "S.1187 – A bill to designate the area between the intersections of International Drive, Northwest and Van Ness Street, Northwest and International Drive, Northwest and International Place, Northwest in Washington, District of Columbia, as "Liu Xiaobo Plaza", and for other purposes". Congress.gov. Retrieved 16 July 2017.

^ Meadows, Mark. "H.R.2537 – To designate the area between the intersections of International Drive Northwest and Van Ness Street Northwest and International Drive Northwest and International Place Northwest in Washington, District of Columbia, as "Liu Xiaobo Plaza", and for other purposes". Congress.gov. Retrieved 16 July 2017.

^ Thomas, Neil (15 July 2017). "After dissident's death, Ted Cruz hopeful about changing Chinese Embassy address". Texas Tribune. Retrieved 16 July 2017.

^ "Trump praises Xi soon after death of Chinese dissident". CNBC. 13 July 2017.

^ "Statement by President George W. Bush on the death of Liu Xiaobo". North Texas e-News. Retrieved 14 July 2017.

^ "Joint statement by the President of the European Commission, Jean-Claude Juncker, and the President of the European Council, Donald Tusk on the passing away of Liu Xiaobo" (Press release). Europa (web portal).

^ Original title: 《选择的批判——与李泽厚对话》, published by 上海人民出版社

^ Original title: 《选择的批判—与思想领袖李泽厚对话》, published by 台湾风云时代出版公司

^ Original title: 《审美与人的自由》, published by 北京師范大學出版社

^ Original title: 《赤身裸体，走向上帝》, published by 时代文艺出版社

^ Original title: 《形而上学的迷雾》, published by 上海人民出版社

^ Original title: 《思想之谜与人类之梦》（二卷）, by 台湾风云时代出版公司

^ Original title: 《中国当代政治与中国知识份子》, published by 台北唐山出版社

^ Original title: 《現代中国知識人批判》, published by 日本德间书店

^ Original title: 《末日幸存者的独白》, published by 台湾中国时报出版社

^ Original title: 《刘晓波刘霞诗选》, published by 香港夏菲尔国际出版公司

^ Original title: 《美人赠我蒙汗药》, published by 长江文艺出版社

^ Original title: 《向良心说谎的民族》, published by 台湾捷幼出版社

^ Original title: 《未来的自由中国在民间》, published by 劳改基金会

^ Original title: 《单刃毒剑——中国当代民族主义批判》, published by 美国博大出版社

^ Original title: 《大国沈沦—写给中国的备忘录》, published by 台北允晨文化出版社

^ Original title: 《天安門事件から「08憲章」》, published by 日本藤原书店

^ Original title: 《念念六四》, published by Graywolf Press

^ "Ps". Human Rights Watch.

^ One World Homo Homini award goes to Chinese dissident，12 March 2009 .

^ "Liu Xiaobo". Deutsche Welle. 29 April 2009. Retrieved 29 April 2009.

^ Liu Xiaobo DW, 7 October 2010.

^ "LIU XIAOBO'S NOBEL PEACE PRIZE WIN PUTS SPOTLIGHT ON CHINA RIGHTS VIOLATIONS".

^ http://motta.gidd.eu.org Archived 22 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine Giuseppe Motta Medal Website

External links

 Wikiquote has quotations related to: Liu Xiaobo

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Liu Xiaobo.

 Wikinews has related news:
 Nobel Peace Prize winning Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo dies, aged 61

Liu's verdict and articles cited as evidence of Liu's guilt in the verdict

Liu Xiaobo's 2009 criminal verdict

"The Communist Party of China’s Dictatorial Patriotism"

"Can It Be that the Chinese People Deserve Only Party-Led Democracy?"

"Changing the Regime by Changing Society"

"The Negative Effects of the Rise of Dictatorship on World Democratization"

"Further Questions about Child Slavery in China's Kilns"

Charter 08

Other items written by Liu Xiaobo

Letter from Liu Xiaobo to Liao Yiwu (2000)

"The Rise of Civil Society in China" (2003)

"Atop a Volcano" (2004)

"Remembering June 4th for China's Future" (2005)

The Poet in an Unknown Prison letter by Liu from The New York Review of Books (2009)

No Enemies, No Hatred: Selected Essays and Poems (2011)

"Behind The Rise of the Great Powers" in Guernica Magazine, January 2012

Huang, Zheping; Huang, Echo (17 July 2017). "Dying in custody, a Nobel prize-winning Chinese dissident wrote this last love letter to his wife". Quartz.

English language articles and interviews

Film Excerpts of Liu Xiaobo from The Gate of Heavenly Peace

Interview with Liu Xiaobo (English and Chinese) by PEN American Center on YouTube

Other items related to Liu Xiaobo

30 September 2009 floor debate in U.S. Congress on the Liu Xiaobo resolution on YouTube

Jailed Chinese Dissident Liu Xiaobo Awarded Nobel Peace Prize—video report by Democracy Now!

"Liu Xiaobo’s Plea for the Human Spirit"—essay by Jonathan Mirsky in the Sunday Book Review in The New York Times 30 December 2011

Nobel Peace Prize Laureate Liu Xiaobo and the Future of Political Reform in China: Hearing before the Congressional-Executive Commission on China, One Hundred Eleventh Congress, Second Session, 9 November 2010

Two Years Later: The Ongoing Detentions of Nobel Peace Prize Laureate Liu Xiaobo and his Wife Liu Xia: Hearing before the Congressional-Executive Commission on China, One Hundred Twelfth Congress, Second Session, 12 December 2012

A worldwide reading organized for Liu Xiaobo by the international literature festival berlin

Awards and achievements

Preceded by

Barack Obama
 Nobel Peace Prize Laureate

2010
 Succeeded by

Ellen Johnson Sirleaf

Leymah Gbowee

Tawakel Karman

v

t

e

2010 Nobel Prize laureates

Chemistry 
Richard F. Heck (United States)

Ei-ichi Negishi (Japan)

Akira Suzuki (Japan)

Literature 
Mario Vargas Llosa (Peru, Spain)

Peace 
Liu Xiaobo (China)

Physics 
Andre Geim (Russia, Netherlands, United Kingdom)

Konstantin Novoselov (Russia, United Kingdom)

Physiology or Medicine 
Robert G. Edwards (United Kingdom)

Economics 
Peter Diamond (United States)

Dale T. Mortensen (United States)

Christopher A. Pissarides (Cyprus, United Kingdom)

Nobel Prize recipients

1990

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

2000

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

08

09

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

v

t

e

Laureates of the Nobel Peace Prize

1901–1925 
1901: Henry Dunant / Frédéric Passy

1902: Élie Ducommun / Charles Gobat

1903: Randal Cremer

1904: Institut de Droit International

1905: Bertha von Suttner

1906: Theodore Roosevelt

1907: Ernesto Moneta / Louis Renault

1908: Klas Arnoldson / Fredrik Bajer

1909: A. M. F. Beernaert / Paul Estournelles de Constant

1910: International Peace Bureau

1911: Tobias Asser / Alfred Fried

1912: Elihu Root

1913: Henri La Fontaine

1914

1915

1916

1917: International Committee of the Red Cross

1918

1919: Woodrow Wilson

1920: Léon Bourgeois

1921: Hjalmar Branting / Christian Lange

1922: Fridtjof Nansen

1923

1924

1925: Austen Chamberlain / Charles Dawes

1926–1950 
1926: Aristide Briand / Gustav Stresemann

1927: Ferdinand Buisson / Ludwig Quidde

1928

1929: Frank B. Kellogg

1930: Nathan Söderblom

1931: Jane Addams / Nicholas Butler

1932

1933: Norman Angell

1934: Arthur Henderson

1935: Carl von Ossietzky

1936: Carlos Saavedra Lamas

1937: Robert Cecil

1938: Nansen International Office for Refugees

1939

1940

1941

1942

1943

1944: International Committee of the Red Cross

1945: Cordell Hull

1946: Emily Balch / John Mott

1947: Friends Service Council / American Friends Service Committee

1948

1949: John Boyd Orr

1950: Ralph Bunche

1951–1975 
1951: Léon Jouhaux

1952: Albert Schweitzer

1953: George Marshall

1954: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

1955

1956

1957: Lester B. Pearson

1958: Georges Pire

1959: Philip Noel-Baker

1960: Albert Lutuli

1961: Dag Hammarskjöld

1962: Linus Pauling

1963: International Committee of the Red Cross / League of Red Cross Societies

1964: Martin Luther King Jr.

1965: UNICEF

1966

1967

1968: René Cassin

1969: International Labour Organization

1970: Norman Borlaug

1971: Willy Brandt

1972

1973: Lê Đức Thọ (declined award) / Henry Kissinger

1974: Seán MacBride / Eisaku Satō

1975: Andrei Sakharov

1976–2000 
1976: Betty Williams / Mairead Corrigan

1977: Amnesty International

1978: Anwar Sadat / Menachem Begin

1979: Mother Teresa

1980: Adolfo Pérez Esquivel

1981: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

1982: Alva Myrdal / Alfonso García Robles

1983: Lech Wałęsa

1984: Desmond Tutu

1985: International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War

1986: Elie Wiesel

1987: Óscar Arias

1988: UN Peacekeeping Forces

1989: Tenzin Gyatso (14th Dalai Lama)

1990: Mikhail Gorbachev

1991: Aung San Suu Kyi

1992: Rigoberta Menchú

1993: Nelson Mandela / F. W. de Klerk

1994: Shimon Peres / Yitzhak Rabin / Yasser Arafat

1995: Pugwash Conferences / Joseph Rotblat

1996: Carlos Belo / José Ramos-Horta

1997: International Campaign to Ban Landmines / Jody Williams

1998: John Hume / David Trimble

1999: Médecins Sans Frontières

2000: Kim Dae-jung

2001–present 
2001: United Nations / Kofi Annan

2002: Jimmy Carter

2003: Shirin Ebadi

2004: Wangari Maathai

2005: International Atomic Energy Agency / Mohamed ElBaradei

2006: Grameen Bank / Muhammad Yunus

2007: Al Gore / Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

2008: Martti Ahtisaari

2009: Barack Obama

2010: Liu Xiaobo

2011: Ellen Johnson Sirleaf / Leymah Gbowee / Tawakkol Karman

2012: European Union

2013: Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons

2014: Kailash Satyarthi / Malala Yousafzai

2015: Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet

2016: Juan Manuel Santos

2017: International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons

2018: Denis Mukwege / Nadia Murad

2019: Abiy Ahmed

v

t

e

Nobel laureates of the People's Republic of China

Peace 
14th Dalai Lama (1989)

Liu Xiaobo (2010)

Literature 
Mo Yan (2012)

Physiology or Medicine 
Tu Youyou (2015)

v

t

e

Han Chinese Nobel laureates

Chemistry 
Yuan T. Lee (1986)

Roger Y. Tsien (2008)

Physics 
Chen-Ning Yang (1957)

Tsung-Dao Lee (1957)

Samuel C. C. Ting (1976)

Steven Chu (1997)

Daniel C. Tsui (1998)

Charles K. Kao (2009)

Peace 
Liu Xiaobo (2010)

Literature 
Gao Xingjian (2000)

Mo Yan (2012)

Physiology or Medicine 
Tu Youyou (2015)

v

t

e

Homo Homini Award laureates

Sergei Kovalev (1994)

Szeto Wah (1997)

Ibrahim Rugova (1998)

Oswaldo Payá Sardiñas (1999)

Min Ko Naing (2000)

Zackie Achmat (2001)

Thích Huyền Quang (2002)

Thích Quảng Độ (2002)

Thadeus Nguyễn Văn Lý (2002)

Nataša Kandić (2003)

Gheorghe Briceag (2004)

Ales Bialiatski (2005)

Svetlana Gannushkina (2006)

Su Su Nway (2007)

Phyu Phyu Thin (2007)

Nilar Thein (2007)

Liu Xiaobo (2008)

Majid Tavakoli (2009)

Abdollah Momeni (2009)

Azimzhan Askarov (2010)

Doctors Coordinate of Damascus (2011)

Intiqam Aliyev (2012)

Sapijat Magomedova (2013)

Souad Nawfal (2014)

11 Cuban dissidents (2015)

Committee for the Prevention of Torture (2016)

Phạm Đoan Trang (2017)

v

t

e

1989 Tiananmen Square protests

Background 
May Fourth Movement

Tiananmen Incident of 1976

Beijing Spring

1986 Chinese student demonstrations

Anti-Spiritual Pollution Campaign

Corruption

Economic reform

Household-responsibility system

Socialism with Chinese characteristics

Criticism of communism

Chronology 
April 26 Editorial

April 27 demonstrations

Hunger Strike

Dialogue between students and the government

Funding of student organizations

Mao portrait incident

Sino-Soviet Summit

June 9 Deng speech

Military involvement

Communist Party

Elders 
Deng Xiaoping

Chen Yun

Yang Shangkun

Li Xiannian

Wang Zhen

Peng Zhen

Bo Yibo

Standing Committee 
Zhao Ziyang

Li Peng

Qiao Shi

Hu Qili

Yao Yilin

Regional leaders 
Li Ximing

Chen Xitong

Jiang Zemin

Zhu Rongji

Hu Jintao

Others 
Bao Tong

Hu Yaobang

Luo Gan

Yan Mingfu

Yuan Mu

Wan Li

Wen Jiabao

Wu Xueqian

Protesters

Leading figures 
Bei Dao

Chai Ling

Cui Jian

Dai Qing

Ding Zilin

Fang Lizhi

Fang Zheng

Feng Congde

Liu Gang

Han Dongfang

Hou Dejian

Li Lu

Liu Xianbin

Liu Xiaobo

Qin Benli

Shen Tong

Tang Baiqiao

Wang Bingzhang

Wang Dan

Wang Youcai

Wu'erkaixi

Xiong Yan

Yan Jiaqi

Yu Dongyue

Zhang Boli

Zhao Changqing

Zhou Yongjun

Groups 
Beijing Workers' Autonomous Federation

Beijing Students' Autonomous Federation

Military

Generals 
Liu Huaqing

Chi Haotian

Yang Baibing

Qin Jiwei

Hong Xuezhi

Liang Guanglie

Xu Qinxian

Li Lianxiu

Army units 
12th

15th

20th

24th

26th

27th

28th

38th

39th

40th

54th

63rd

64th

65th

67th

Works 
Almost a Revolution

A Tiananmen Journal

Collection of June Fourth Poems

The Critical Moment – Li Peng Diaries

Escape from China

Execution

The Gate of Heavenly Peace

A Heart for Freedom

Moving the Mountain

Prisoner of the State

Quelling the People

Sunrise Over Tiananmen Square

Tiananmen Exiles

Tiananmen Papers

Pillar of Shame

Chimerica
miniseries

Leica: The Hunt

Human rights groups 
China Support Network

Democracy Party of China

Hong Kong Alliance

Human Rights in China

Information Centre for Human Rights and Democracy

Operation Yellowbird

Tiananmen Mothers

Anniversaries 
10th (1999)

20th (2009)

21st (2010)

24th (2013)

25th (2014)

30th (2019)

31st (2020)

Icons 
"Nothing to My Name"

Tank Man

June 4th Museum

Goddess of Democracy
Hong Kong

Related 
Arrest and trial of Chen Ziming and Wang Juntao

Authority control 
BIBSYS: 10077637

BNE: XX5159799

BNF: cb16501659d (data)

CANTIC: a1129789x

GND: 122197097

ISNI: 0000 0001 1879 4097

LCCN: n2009041191

LNB: 000226823

MusicBrainz: ca2338d6-5fca-4c8d-a962-a5e8ec3b501e

NCL: 516820

NDL: 00316034

NKC: js20101124001

NLK: KAC201102931

NTA: 147944910

SELIBR: 349119

SUDOC: 151664803

VIAF: 91029317

 WorldCat Identities: lccn-n2009041191

China portal

Biography portal

Poetry portal
