"Geomorphic process by which soil, sand, regolith, and rock move downslope

This article includes a list of references, related reading or external links, but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (December 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Talus cones produced by mass wasting, north shore of Isfjord, Svalbard, Norway.

Mass wasting at Palo Duro Canyon, West Texas (2002)

A rockfall in Grand Canyon National Park

Mass wasting, also known as slope movement or mass movement, is the geomorphic process by which soil, sand, regolith, and rock move downslope typically as a solid, continuous or discontinuous mass, largely under the force of gravity, frequently with characteristics of a flow as in debris flows and mudflows. Types of mass wasting include creep, slides, flows, topples, and falls, each with its own characteristic features, and taking place over timescales from seconds to hundreds of years. Mass wasting occurs on both terrestrial and submarine slopes, and has been observed on Earth, Mars, Venus, and Jupiter's moon Io.

When the gravitational force acting on a slope exceeds its resisting force, slope failure (mass wasting) occurs. The slope material's strength and cohesion and the amount of internal friction within the material help maintain the slope's stability and are known collectively as the slope's shear strength. The steepest angle that a cohesionless slope can maintain without losing its stability is known as its angle of repose. When a slope made of loose material possesses this angle, its shear strength counterbalances the force of gravity acting upon it.

Mass wasting may occur at a very slow rate, particularly in areas that are very dry or those areas that receive sufficient rainfall such that vegetation has stabilized the surface. It may also occur at very high speed, such as in rockslides or landslides, with disastrous consequences, both immediate and delayed, e.g., resulting from the formation of landslide dams. Factors that change the potential of mass wasting include: change in slope angle, weakening of material by weathering, increased water content; changes in vegetation cover, and overloading.

Volcano flanks can become over-steep resulting in instability and mass wasting. This is now a recognised part of the growth of all active volcanoes. It is seen on submarine volcanoes as well as surface volcanoes: Loihi in the Hawaiian volcanic chain and Kick 'em Jenny in the Caribbean volcanic arc are two submarine volcanoes that are known to undergo mass wasting. The failure of the northern flank of Mount St Helens in 1980 showed how rapidly volcanic flanks can deform and fail.

Contents

1 Role of water

2 Types

2.1 Creep

2.2 Landslide

3 Triggers

4 Mitigation

5 See also

6 References

7 Further reading

8 External links

Role of water

Water can increase or decrease the stability of a slope depending on the amount present. Small amounts of water can strengthen soils because the surface tension of water increases soil cohesion. This allows the soil to resist erosion better than if it were dry. If too much water is present the water may act to increase the pore pressure, reducing friction, and accelerating the erosion process and resulting in different types of mass wasting (i.e. mudflows, landslides, etc.). A good example of this is to think of a sand castle. Water must be mixed with sand for the castle to keep its shape. If too much water is added the sand washes away, if not enough water is added the sand falls and cannot keep its shape. Water also increases the mass of the soil, this is important because an increase in mass means that there will be an increase in velocity if mass wasting is triggered.
Saturated water, however, eases the process of mass wasting in that the rock and soil debris are easily washed down-slope.

Types

Based on how the soil, regolith or rock moves downslope as a whole, mass movements can be broadly classified as creeps and landslides.

Creep

Soil creep is a slow and long term mass movement. The combination of small movements of soil or rock in different directions over time is directed by gravity gradually downslope. The steeper the slope, the faster the creep. The creep makes trees and shrubs curve to maintain their perpendicularity, and they can trigger landslides if they lose their root footing. The surface soil can migrate under the influence of cycles of freezing and thawing, or hot and cold temperatures, inching its way towards the bottom of the slope forming terracettes. Landslides are often preceded by soil creep accompanied with soil sloughing — loose soil that falls and accumulates at the base of the steepest creep sections. 

Landslide

A landslide, also called a landslip, is a slow or rapid movement of a large mass of earth and rocks down a hill or a mountainside. Little or no flowage of the materials occurs on a given slope until heavy rain and resultant lubrication by the same rainwater facilitate the movement of the materials, causing a landslide to occur. 

In particular, if the main feature of the movement is a slide along a planar or curved surface, the landslide is termed slump, earth slide, debris slide or rock slide, depending on the prevailing material.

Movement of soil and regolith that more resembles fluid behaviour is called a flow. These include avalanches, mudflows, debris flows, earth flow, lahars and sturzstroms. Water, air and ice are often involved in enabling fluid-like motion of the material.

A fall, including rockfall and debris fall occurs where regolith cascades down a slope, but is not of sufficient volume or viscosity to behave as a flow. Falls are promoted in rocks which are characterized by the presence of vertical cracks. Falls can also result from undercutting by running water as well as by waves. They usually occur at very steep slopes such as a cliff face. The rock material may be loosened by earthquakes, rain, plant-root wedging and expanding ice, among other things. The accumulation of rock material that has fallen and resides at the base of the structure is known as talus.

Triggers

Soil and regolith remain on a hillslope only while the gravitational forces are unable to overcome the frictional forces keeping the material in place (see slope stability). Some factors that reduce the frictional resistance relative to the downslope forces, and thus can trigger slope movement, can include:

earthquakes

increased overburden from structures

increased soil moisture

reduction of roots holding the soil to bedrock

undercutting of the slope by excavation or erosion

weathering by frost heave or chemical dissolution

bioturbation

Mitigation

Afforestation

Re-Afforestation

Terracing steps on slopes or, more generally, re-modeling its shape

Slope stabilization

See also

SMR classification

References

^ Britannica

^ "Indicators of potentially unstable slopes" (PDF). Sound Native Plants. Retrieved 2019-01-22.

Further reading

Monroe, Wicander (2005). The Changing Earth: Exploring Geology and Evolution. Thomson Brooks/Cole. ISBN 0-495-01020-0.

Selby, M.J. (1993). Hillslope Materials and Processes, 2e. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-874183-9.

Fundamentals Of Physical Geography (Class 11th NCERT). ISBN 81-7450-518-0

External links

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mass movements (geology).

Georgia Perimeter College: Mass Wasting

CSU Long Beach: Introduction to Mass Wasting

WFPA: Geology, Topography, Storms and Landslides in Washington State

v

t

e

Geotechnical engineering

Offshore geotechnical engineering

Investigation and

instrumentation

Field (in situ) 
 Core drill

 Cone penetration test

 Geo-electrical sounding

 Permeability test

 Load test
Static

Dynamic

Statnamic

 Pore pressure measurement
Piezometer

Well

 Ram sounding

 Rock control drilling

 Rotary-pressure sounding

 Rotary weight sounding

 Sample series

 Screw plate test

Deformation monitoring
 Inclinometer

 Settlement recordings

 Shear vane test

 Simple sounding

 Standard penetration test

 Total sounding

 Trial pit

 Visible bedrock

Nuclear densometer test

Exploration geophysics

Crosshole sonic logging

Pile integrity test

Wave equation analysis

Laboratory testing 
Soil classification

Atterberg limits

California bearing ratio

Direct shear test

Hydrometer

Proctor compaction test

R-value

Sieve analysis

Triaxial shear test

Oedometer test

Hydraulic conductivity tests

Water content tests

Soil

Types 
Clay

Silt

Sand

Gravel

Peat

Loam

Loess

Properties 
Hydraulic conductivity

Water content

Void ratio

Bulk density

Thixotropy

Reynolds' dilatancy

Angle of repose

Friction angle

Cohesion

Porosity

Permeability

Specific storage

Shear strength

Sensitivity

Structures (Interaction)

Natural features 
Topography

Vegetation

Terrain

Topsoil

Water table

Bedrock

Subgrade

Subsoil

Earthworks 
Shoring structures
Retaining walls

Gabion

Ground freezing

Mechanically stabilized earth

Pressure grouting

Slurry wall

Soil nailing

Tieback

Land development

Landfill

Excavation

Trench

Embankment

Cut

Causeway

Terracing

Cut-and-cover

Cut and fill

Fill dirt

Grading

Land reclamation

Track bed

Erosion control

Earth structure

Expanded clay aggregate

Crushed stone

Geosynthetics
Geotextile

Geomembrane

Geosynthetic clay liner

Cellular confinement

Infiltration

Foundations 
Shallow

Deep

Mechanics

Forces 
Effective stress

Pore water pressure

Lateral earth pressure

Overburden pressure

Preconsolidation pressure

Phenomena/problems 
Permafrost

Frost heaving

Consolidation

Compaction

Earthquake
Response spectrum

Seismic hazard

Shear wave

Landslide analysis
Stability analysis

Mitigation

Classification

Sliding criterion

Slab stabilisation

Bearing capacity

Numerical analysis software 
SEEP2D

STABL

SVFlux

SVSlope

UTEXAS

Plaxis

Related fields 
Geology

Geochemistry

Petrology

Earthquake engineering

Geomorphology

Soil science

Hydrology

Hydrogeology

Biogeography

Earth materials

Archaeology

Agricultural science
Agrology

v

t

e

Geologic principles and processes

Stratigraphic principles 
Principle of original horizontality

Law of superposition

Principle of lateral continuity

Principle of cross-cutting relationships

Principle of faunal succession

Principle of inclusions and components

Walther's law

Petrologic principles 
Intrusive

Extrusive

Volcanic

Exfoliation

Weathering

Pedogenesis

Diagenesis

Compaction

Metamorphism

Geomorphologic processes 
Plate tectonics

Salt tectonics

Tectonic uplift

Subsidence

Marine transgression

Marine regression

Sediment transport 
Fluvial processes

Aeolian processes

Glacial processes

Mass wasting processes
