"Form of Latin used in the Middle Ages

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Medieval Latin" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (May 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Medieval Latin

LINGVA LATINA

lingua latina

Lingua Latina

Carmina Cantabrigiensia, Medieval Latin manuscript

Native to Numerous small states

Region Most of Europe

Era Developed from Late Latin between 4th and 10th centuries; replaced by Renaissance Latin from the 14th century

Language family

Indo-European

Italic Latino-FaliscanLatinMedieval Latin

Early forms

Old Latin
Classical Latin
Late Latin

Writing system

Latin alphabet

Official status

Official language in

De facto in most Catholic and/or Romance-speaking states during the Middle Ages

Language codes

ISO 639-3 –

Linguist List

lat-med

Glottolog None

Europe, AD 1000

Medieval Latin is the form of Latin used in Roman Catholic Western Europe during the Middle Ages. In this region it served as the primary written language, though local languages were also written to varying degrees. Latin functioned as the main medium of scholarly exchange, as the liturgical language of the Church, and as the working language of science, literature, law, and administration.

Medieval Latin represented a continuation of Classical Latin and Late Latin, with enhancements for new concepts as well as for the increasing integration of Christianity. Despite some meaningful differences from Classical Latin, Medieval writers did not regard it as a fundamentally different language. There is no real consensus on the exact boundary where Late Latin ends and Medieval Latin begins. Some scholarly surveys begin with the rise of early Ecclesiastical Latin in the middle of the 4th century, others around 500, and still others with the replacement of written Late Latin by written Romance languages starting around the year 900.

The terms Medieval Latin and Ecclesiastical Latin are often used synonymously, though some scholars draw distinctions. Ecclesiastical Latin refers specifically to the form that has been used by the Roman Catholic Church, whereas Medieval Latin refers more broadly to all of the (written) forms of Latin used in the Middle Ages. The Romance languages spoken in the Middle Ages were often referred to as Latin, since the Romance languages were all descended from Vulgar Latin itself.

Contents

1 Influences

1.1 Christian Latin

1.2 Vulgar Latin

2 Changes in vocabulary, syntax, and grammar

2.1 Syntax

3 Orthography

4 Medieval Latin literature

5 Medieval Latin and everyday life

6 Important medieval Latin authors

6.1 4th–5th centuries

6.2 6th–8th centuries

6.3 9th century

6.4 10th century

6.5 11th century

6.6 12th century

6.7 13th century

6.8 14th century

7 Literary movements

8 Works

9 References

9.1 Citations

9.2 Sources

10 Further reading

11 External links

Influences

Christian Latin

Medieval Latin had an enlarged vocabulary, which freely borrowed from other sources. It was heavily influenced by the language of the Vulgate, which contained many peculiarities alien to Classical Latin that resulted from a more or less direct translation from Greek and Hebrew; the peculiarities mirrored the original not only in its vocabulary but also in its grammar and syntax. Greek provided much of the technical vocabulary of Christianity. The various Germanic languages spoken by the Germanic tribes, who invaded southern Europe, were also major sources of new words. Germanic leaders became the rulers of parts of the Roman Empire that they conquered, and words from their languages were freely imported into the vocabulary of law. Other more ordinary words were replaced by coinages from Vulgar Latin or Germanic sources because the classical words had fallen into disuse.

An illuminated manuscript of a Book of Hours contains prayers in medieval Latin.

Latin was also spread to areas such as Ireland and Germany, where Romance languages were not spoken, and which had never known Roman rule. Works written in those lands where Latin was a learned language, having no relation to the local vernacular, also influenced the vocabulary and syntax of medieval Latin.

Since subjects like science and philosophy, including Argumentation theory and Ethics (pre-law), were communicated in Latin, the Latin vocabulary that developed for them became the source of a great many technical words in modern languages. English words like abstract, subject, communicate, matter, probable and their cognates in other European languages generally have the meanings given to them in medieval Latin.

Vulgar Latin

The influence of Vulgar Latin was also apparent in the syntax of some medieval Latin writers, although Classical Latin continued to be held in high esteem and studied as models for literary compositions. The high point of the development of medieval Latin as a literary language came with the Carolingian renaissance, a rebirth of learning kindled under the patronage of Charlemagne, king of the Franks. Alcuin was Charlemagne's Latin secretary and an important writer in his own right; his influence led to a rebirth of Latin literature and learning after the depressed period following the final disintegration of the authority of the Western Roman Empire.

Although it was simultaneously developing into the Romance languages, Latin itself remained very conservative, as it was no longer a native language and there were many ancient and medieval grammar books to give one standard form. On the other hand, strictly speaking there was no single form of "medieval Latin". Every Latin author in the medieval period spoke Latin as a second language, with varying degrees of fluency and syntax. Grammar and vocabulary, however, were often influenced by an author's native language. This was especially true beginning around the 12th century, after which the language became increasingly adulterated: late medieval Latin documents written by French speakers tend to show similarities to medieval French grammar and vocabulary; those written by Germans tend to show similarities to German, etc. For instance, rather than following the classical Latin practice of generally placing the verb at the end, medieval writers would often follow the conventions of their own native language instead. Whereas Latin had no definite or indefinite articles, medieval writers sometimes used forms of unus as an indefinite article, and forms of ille (reflecting usage in the Romance languages) as a definite article or even quidam (meaning "a certain one/thing" in Classical Latin) as something like an article. Unlike classical Latin, where esse ("to be") was the only auxiliary verb, medieval Latin writers might use habere ("to have") as an auxiliary, similar to constructions in Germanic and Romance languages. The accusative and infinitive construction in classical Latin was often replaced by a subordinate clause introduced by quod or quia. This is almost identical, for example, to the use of que in similar constructions in French.

In every age from the late 8th century onwards, there were learned writers (especially within the Church) who were familiar enough with classical syntax to be aware that these forms and usages were "wrong" and resisted their use. Thus the Latin of a theologian like St Thomas Aquinas or of an erudite clerical historian such as William of Tyre tends to avoid most of the characteristics described above, showing its period in vocabulary and spelling alone; the features listed are much more prominent in the language of lawyers (e.g. the 11th-century English Domesday Book), physicians, technical writers and secular chroniclers. However the use of quod to introduce subordinate clauses was especially pervasive and is found at all levels.

Changes in vocabulary, syntax, and grammar

Medieval Latin had ceased to be a living language and was instead a scholarly language of the minority of educated men in medieval Europe, used in official documents more than for everyday communication. This resulted in two major features of Medieval Latin compared with Classical Latin, though when it is compared to the other vernacular languages, Medieval Latin developed very few changes. There are many prose constructions written by authors of this period that can be considered "showing off" a knowledge of Classical or Old Latin by the use of rare or archaic forms and sequences. Though they had not existed together historically, it is common that an author would use grammatical ideas of the two periods Republican and archaic, placing them equally in the same sentence. As well, many undistinguished scholars had limited educations of "proper" Latin, or had been influenced in their writings by Vulgar Latin.

Word order usually tended towards that of the vernacular language of the author, not the artificial and polished word order of Classical Latin. Conversely, an erudite scholar might attempt to "show off" by intentionally constructing a very complicated sentence. Because Latin is an inflected language, it is technically possible to place related words at opposite ends of a paragraph-long sentence, and owing to the complexity of doing so, it was seen by some as a sign of great skill.

Typically, prepositions are used much more frequently (as in modern Romance languages) for greater clarity, instead of using the ablative case alone. Further, in Classical Latin the subject of a verb was often left implied, unless it was being stressed: videt = "he sees". For clarity, Medieval Latin more frequently includes an explicit subject: is videt = "he sees" without necessarily stressing the subject.

Various changes occurred in vocabulary, and certain words were mixed into different declensions or conjugations. Many new compound verbs were formed. Some words retained their original structure but drastically changed in meaning: animositas specifically means "wrath" in Medieval Latin while in Classical Latin, it generally referred to "high spirits, excited spirits" of any kind.

Owing to heavy use of biblical terms, there was a large influx of new words borrowed from Greek and Hebrew and even some grammatical influences. That obviously largely occurred among priests and scholars, not the laity. In general, it is difficult to express abstract concepts in Latin, as many scholars admitted. For example, Plato's abstract concept of "the Truth" had to be expressed in Latin as "what is always true". Medieval scholars and theologians, translating both the Bible and Greek philosophers into Latin out of the Koine and Classical Greek, cobbled together many new abstract concept words in Latin.

Syntax

Indirect discourse, which in Classical Latin was achieved by using a subject accusative and infinitive, was now often simply replaced by new conjunctions serving the function of English "that" such as quod, quia, or quoniam. There was a high level of overlap between the old and new constructions, even within the same author's work, and it was often a matter of preference. A particularly famous and often cited example is from the Venerable Bede, using both constructions within the same sentence: "Dico me scire et quod sum ignobilis" = "I say that I know  and that I am unknown ". The resulting subordinate clause often used the subjunctive mood instead of the indicative. This new syntax for indirect discourse is among the most prominent features of Medieval Latin, the largest syntactical change.

Several substitutions were often used instead of subjunctive clause constructions. They did not break the rules of Classical Latin but were an alternative way to express the same meaning, avoiding the use of a subjunctive clause.
The present participle was frequently used adverbially in place of qui or cum clauses, such as clauses of time, cause, concession, and purpose. That was loosely similar to the use of the present participle in an ablative absolute phrase, but the participle did not need to be in the ablative case.

Habeo (I have ) and "Debeo" (I must) would be used to express obligation more often than the gerundive.
Given that obligation inherently carries a sense of futurity ("Carthage must be destroyed" at some point in the future), it anticipates how the Romance languages such as French would use "habeo" as the basis for their future tenses (abandoning the Latin forms of the future tense). While in Latin "amare habeo" is the indirect discourse "I have to love", in the French equivalent,"aimerai" (habeo > ayyo > ai, aimer+ai), it has become the future tense, "I shall love", losing the sense of obligation. In Medieval Latin, however, it was still indirect discourse and not yet used as simply a future tense.

Instead of a clause introduced by ut or ne, an infinitive was often used with a verb of hoping, fearing, promising, etc.

Conversely, some authors might haphazardly switch between the subjunctive and indicative forms of verbs, with no intended difference in meaning.

The usage of sum changed significantly: it was frequently omitted or implied. Further, many medieval authors did not feel that it made sense for the perfect passive construction "laudatus sum" to use the present tense of esse in a past tense construction so they began using fui, the past perfect of sum, interchangeably with sum.

Chaos in the usage of demonstrative pronouns. Hic, ille, iste, and even the intensive ipse are often used virtually interchangeably. In anticipation of Romance languages, hic and ille were also frequently used simply to express the definite article "the", which Classical Latin did not possess. Unus was also used for the indefinite article "a, an".

Use of reflexives became much looser. A reflexive pronoun in a subordinate clause might refer to the subject of the main clause. The reflexive possessive suus might be used in place of a possessive genitive such as eius.

Comparison of adjectives changed somewhat. The comparative form was sometimes used with positive or superlative meaning. Also, the adverb "magis" was often used with a positive adjective to indicate a comparative meaning,and multum and nimis could be used with a positive form of adjective to give a superlative meaning.

Classical Latin used the ablative absolute, but as stated above, in Medieval Latin examples of nominative absolute or accusative absolute may be found. This was a point of difference between the ecclesiastical Latin of the clergy and the "Vulgar Latin" of the laity, which existed alongside it. The educated clergy mostly knew that traditional Latin did not use the nominative or accusative case in such constructions, but only the ablative case. These constructions are observed in the medieval era, but they are changes that developed among the uneducated commoners.

Classical Latin does not distinguish progressive action in the present tense, thus laudo can mean either "I praise" or "I am praising". In imitation of Greek, Medieval Latin could use a present participle with sum to form a periphrastic tense equivalent to the English progressive. This "Greek Periphrastic Tense" formation could also be done in the past and future tenses: laudans sum ("I am praising"), laudans eram ("I was praising"), laudans ero ("I shall be praising").

Classical Latin verbs had at most two voices, active and passive, but Greek (the original language of the New Testament) had an additional "middle voice" (or reflexive voice). One use was to express when the subject is acting upon itself: "Achilles put the armor onto himself" or "Jesus clothed himself in the robe" would use the middle voice. Because Latin had no middle voice, Medieval Latin expresses such sentences by putting the verb in the passive voice form, but the conceptual meaning is active (similar to Latin deponent verbs). For example, the Medieval Latin translation of Genesis states literally, "the Spirit of God was moved over the waters" ("spiritus Dei ferebatur super aquas", Genesis 1:2), but it is just expressing a Greek middle-voice verb: "God moved  over the waters".

Overlapping with orthography differences (see below), certain diphthongs were sometimes shortened: "oe" to "e", and "ae" to "e". Thus, "oecumenicus" becomes the more familiar "ecumenicus" (more familiar in this later form because religious terms such as "ecumenical" were more common in medieval Latin). The "oe" diphthong is not particularly frequent in Latin, but the shift from "ae" to "e" affects many common words, such as "caelum" (heaven) being shortened to "celum"; even "puellae" (girls) was shortened to "puelle".

Often, a town would lose its name to that of the tribe which was either accusative or ablative plural; two forms that were then used for all cases, or in other words, considered "indeclinable".

Orthography

The Prüfening dedicatory inscription of 1119, composed in medieval Latin.

Many striking differences between classical and medieval Latin are found in orthography. Perhaps the most striking difference is that medieval manuscripts used a wide range of abbreviations by means of superscripts, special characters etc.: for instance the letters "n" and "s" were often omitted and replaced by a diacritical mark above the preceding or following letter. Apart from this, some of the most frequently occurring differences are as follows. Clearly many of these would have been influenced by the spelling, and indeed pronunciation, of the vernacular language, and thus varied between different European countries.

Following the Carolingian reforms of the 9th century, Carolingian minuscule was widely adopted, leading to a clear differentiation between capital and lowercase letters.

A partial or full differentiation between v and u, and between j and i.

The diphthong ae is usually collapsed and simply written as e (or e caudata, ę); for example, puellae might be written puelle (or puellę). The same happens with the diphthong oe, for example in pena, Edipus, from poena, Oedipus. This feature is already found on coin inscriptions of the 4th century (e.g. reipublice for reipublicae). Conversely, an original e in Classical Latin was often represented by ae or oe (e.g. aecclesia and coena), also reflected in English spellings such as foetus.

Because of a severe decline in the knowledge of Greek, in loanwords and foreign names from or transmitted through Greek, y and i might be used more or less interchangeably: Ysidorus, Egiptus, from Isidorus, Aegyptus. This is also found in pure Latin words: ocius ("more swiftly") appears as ocyus and silva as sylva, this last being a form which survived into the 18th century and so became embedded in modern botanical Latin (also cf. Pennsylvania).

h might be lost, so that habere becomes abere, or mihi becomes mi (the latter also occurred in Classical Latin); or mihi may be written michi, indicating that the h had come to be pronounced as k or perhaps kh. This pronunciation is not found in Classical Latin.

The loss of h in pronunciation also led to the addition of h in writing where it did not previously belong, especially in the vicinity of r, such as chorona for corona, a tendency also sometimes seen in Classical Latin.

-ti- before a vowel is often written as -ci- , so that divitiae becomes diviciae (or divicie), tertius becomes tercius, vitium vicium.

The combination mn might have another plosive inserted, so that alumnus becomes alumpnus, somnus sompnus.

Single consonants were often doubled, or vice versa, so that tranquillitas becomes tranquilitas and Africa becomes Affrica.

Syncopation became more frequent: vi, especially in verbs in the perfect tense, might be lost, so that novisse becomes nosse (this occurred in Classical Latin as well but was much more frequent in medieval Latin).

These orthographical differences were often due to changes in pronunciation or, as in the previous example, morphology, which authors reflected in their writing. By the 16th century, Erasmus complained that speakers from different countries were unable to understand each other's form of Latin.

The gradual changes in Latin did not escape the notice of contemporaries. Petrarch, writing in the 14th century, complained about this linguistic "decline", which helped fuel his general dissatisfaction with his own era.

Medieval Latin literature

The corpus of medieval Latin literature encompasses a wide range of texts, including such diverse works as sermons, hymns, hagiographical texts, travel literature, histories, epics, and lyric poetry.

The first half of the 5th century saw the literary activities of the great Christian authors Jerome (c. 347–420) and Augustine of Hippo (354–430), whose texts had an enormous influence on theological thought of the Middle Ages, and of the latter's disciple Prosper of Aquitaine (c. 390-455). Of the later 5th century and early 6th century, Sidonius Apollinaris (c. 430 – after 489) and Ennodius (474–521), both from Gaul, are well known for their poems, as is Venantius Fortunatus (c. 530–600). This was also a period of transmission: the Roman patrician Boethius (c. 480–524) translated part of Aristotle's logical corpus, thus preserving it for the Latin West, and wrote the influential literary and philosophical treatise De consolatione Philosophiae; Cassiodorus (c. 485–585) founded an important library at the monastery of Vivarium near Squillace where many texts from Antiquity were to be preserved. Isidore of Seville (c. 560-636) collected all scientific knowledge still available in his time into what might be called the first encyclopedia, the Etymologiae.

Gregory of Tours (c. 538–594) wrote a lengthy history of the Frankish kings. Gregory came from a Gallo-Roman aristocratic family, and his Latin, which shows many aberrations from the classical forms, testifies to the declining significance of classical education in Gaul. At the same time, good knowledge of Latin and even of Greek was being preserved in monastic culture in Ireland and was brought to England and the European mainland by missionaries in the course of the 6th and 7th centuries, such as Columbanus (543–615), who founded the monastery of Bobbio in Northern Italy. Ireland was also the birthplace of a strange poetic style known as Hisperic Latin. Other important Insular authors include the historian Gildas (c. 500–570) and the poet Aldhelm (c. 640–709). Benedict Biscop (c. 628–690) founded the monastery of Wearmouth-Jarrow and furnished it with books which he had taken home from a journey to Rome and which were later used by Bede (c. 672–735) to write his Ecclesiastical History of the English People.

Many medieval Latin works have been published in the series Patrologia Latina, Corpus Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Latinorum and Corpus Christianorum.

Medieval Latin and everyday life

Medieval Latin was separated from Classical Latin around 800 and at this time was no longer considered part of the everyday language. Spoken Latin became a practice used mostly by the educated high class population. Even then it was not frequently used in casual conversation. An example of these men includes the churchmen who could read Latin, but could not effectively speak it. Latin's use in universities was structured in lectures and debates, however, it was highly recommended that students use it in conversation. This practice was kept up only due to rules. One of Latin's purposes, writing, was still in practice; the main uses being charters for property transactions and to keep track of the pleadings given in court. Even then, those of the church still used Latin more than the rest of the population. At this time, Latin served little purpose to the regular population but was still used regularly in ecclesiastical culture.

Important medieval Latin authors

4th–5th centuries

Aetheria (fl. 385)

Jerome (c. 347–420)

Augustine (354-430)

6th–8th centuries

Boëthius (c. 480 – 525)

Cassiodorus (c. 485 – c. 585)

Gildas (d. c. 570)

Flavius Cresconius Corippus (d. c. 570)

Venantius Fortunatus (c. 530 – c. 600)

Gregory of Tours (c. 538–594)

Pope Gregory I (c. 540 – 604)

Isidore of Seville (c. 560–636)

Bede (c. 672–735)

St. Boniface (c. 672 - 754)

Chrodegang of Metz (d. 766)

Paul the Deacon (720s - c.799)

Beatus of Liébana (c. 730 - 800)

Peter of Pisa (d. 799)

Paulinus of Aquileia (730s - 802)

Alcuin (c. 735–804)

9th century

Einhard (775-840)

Rabanus Maurus (780-856)

Paschasius Radbertus (790-865)

Rudolf of Fulda (d. 865)

Dhuoda

Lupus of Ferrieres (805-862)

Andreas Agnellus (Agnellus of Ravenna) (c. 805-846?)

Hincmar (806-882)

Walafrid Strabo (808-849)

Florus of Lyon (d. 860?)

Gottschalk (theologian) (808-867)

Sedulius Scottus (fl. 840-860)

Anastasius Bibliothecarius (810-878)

Johannes Scotus Eriugena (815-877)

Asser (d. 909)

Notker Balbulus (840-912)

10th century

Ratherius (890–974)

Hrotsvitha of Gandersheim (935-973)

Thietmar of Merseburg (975–1018)

11th century

Marianus Scotus (1028–1082)

Adam of Bremen (fl. 1060–1080)

Anselm of Canterbury (1033/4-1109)

Marbodius of Rennes (c. 1035-1123)

12th century

Pierre Abélard (1079–1142)

Suger of St Denis (c. 1081–1151)

Geoffrey of Monmouth (c. 1100 – c. 1155)

Ailred of Rievaulx (1110–1167)

Otto of Freising (c. 1114–1158)

Archpoet (c. 1130 - c. 1165)

William of Tyre (c. 1130-1185)

Peter of Blois (c. 1135 – c. 1203)

Walter of Châtillon (fl. c. 1200)

Adam of St. Victor

13th century

Giraldus Cambrensis (c. 1146 – c. 1223)

Saxo Grammaticus (c. 1150 – c. 1220)

Anonymous (fl. late 12th century – early 13th century)

Thomas of Celano (c. 1200 – c. 1265)

Albertus Magnus (c. 1200–1280)

Roger Bacon (c. 1214–1294)

St Thomas Aquinas (c. 1225–1274)

Ramon Llull (1232–1315)

Siger of Brabant (c. 1240–1280s)

Duns Scotus (c. 1266–1308)

14th century

See also: Renaissance Latin

Ranulf Higdon (c. 1280 - c. 1363)

William of Ockham (c. 1288 - c. 1347)

Jean Buridan (1300 – 1358)

Henry Suso (c. 1295 - 1366)

Literary movements

Goliards

Hiberno-Latin

Medieval Roman Law

Medieval Latin comedy

Riddle Poems

Works

Carmina Burana (11th - 12th century)

Pange Lingua (ca.1250)

Summa Theologiae (ca.1270)

Etymologiae (ca.600)

Dies Irae (ca.1260)

Decretum Gratiani (ca.1150)

De Ortu Waluuanii Nepotis Arturi (ca.1180)

Magna Carta (ca.1215)

References

Citations

^ Ziolkowski, Jan M. (1996), "Towards a History of Medieval Latin Literature", in Mantello, F. A. C.; Rigg, A. G. (eds.), Medieval Latin: An Introduction and Bibliographical Guide, Washington, D.C., pp. 505-536 (pp. 510-511)

^ "Romance languages". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 27 November 2018.

^ J. Franklin, Mental furniture from the philosophers, Et Cetera 40 (1983), 177-91.

^ a b c d Mantello, F. A. C., Rigg, A. G. (1996). Medieval Latin: An Introduction and Bibliographical Guide. United States of America: The Catholic University of America Press. p. 85. ISBN 0813208416.

^ a b Beeson, Charles Henry (1986). A Primer of Medieval Latin: an anthology of prose and poetry. Washington, D.C.: Catholic University of America Press. ISBN 0813206359.

^ See Desiderius Erasmus, De recta Latini Graecique sermonis pronunciatione dialogus, Basel (Frobenius), 1528.

Sources

K.P. Harrington, J. Pucci, and A.G. Elliott, Medieval Latin (2nd ed.), (Univ. Chicago Press, 1997) ISBN 0-226-31712-9

F.A.C. Mantello and A.G. Rigg, eds., Medieval Latin: An Introduction and Bibliographical Guide (CUA Press, 1996) ISBN 0-8132-0842-4

Dictionaries

Du Cange et al., Glossarium ad scriptores mediæ et infimæ latinitatis, Niort : L. Favre, 1883–1887, Ecole des chartes.

Thesaurus Linguae Latinae

Further reading

Chavannes-Mazel, Claudine A., and Margaret M. Smith, eds. 1996. Medieval Manuscripts of the Latin Classics: Production and Use; Proceedings of the Seminar in the History of the Book to 1500, Leiden, 1993. Los Altos Hills, CA: Anderson-Lovelace.

Lapidge, Michael. 1993. Anglo-Latin Literature 900–1066. London and Rio Grande, OH: Hambledon.

--. 1996. Anglo-Latin Literature 600–899. London and Rio Grande, OH: Hambledon.

Mann, Nicholas, and Birger Munk Olsen, eds. 1997. Medieval and Renaissance Scholarship: Proceedings of the Second European Science Foundation Workshop on the Classical Tradition in the Middle Ages and Renaissance, London: Warburg Institute, 27–28 November, 1992. New York: Brill.

Mantello, F. A. C., and George Rigg. 1996. Medieval Latin: An Introduction and Bibliographical Guide. Washington, DC: Catholic University of American Press.

Pecere, Oronzo, and Michael D. Reeve. 1995. Formative Stages of Classical Traditions: Latin Texts from Antiquity to the Renaissance; Proceedings of a Conference Held at Erice, 16–22 October 1993, as the 6th Course of International School for the Study of Written Records. Spoleto, Italy: Centro Italiano di Studi sull’alto Medioevo.

Raby, F. J. E. 1957. A History of Secular Latin Poetry in the Middle Ages. 2 vols. 2nd ed. Oxford: Clarendon.

Rigg, A. G. 1992. A History of Anglo-Latin Literature A.D. 1066–1422. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Walde, Christine, ed. 2012. Brill’s New Pauly Supplement 5: The Reception of Classical Literature. Leiden, The Netherlands, and Boston: Brill.

Ziolkowski, Jan M., 1993. Talking Animals: Medieval Latin Beast Poetry, 750-1150. Philadelphia, PA, University of Pennsylvania Press.

Raby, F.J.E., 1959. The Oxford Book of Medieval Latin Verse. Amen House, London, Oxford University Press.

Harrington, Karl Pomeroy, 1942. Mediaeval Latin. Norwood, MA, USA, Norwood Press.

Dronke, Peter, vol. 1, 1965. Medieval Latin and the Rise of European Love-Lyric. Oxford, UK, Clarendon Press.

Bacci, Antonii. Varia Latinitatis Scripta II, Inscriptiones Orationes Epistvlae. Rome, Italy, Societas Librania Stvdivm.

Beeson, Charles H., 1925. A Primer of Medieval Latin: An Anthology of Prose and Poetry. Chicago, United States, Scott, Foresman and Company.

Curtius, Ernst Roberts, 1953. European Literature and the Latin Middle Ages. New York, New York, United States, Bollingen Foundation Inc.

Auerbach, Erich, 1965. Literary Language & Its Public: in Late Latin Antiquity and in the Middle Ages. New York, NY, USA, Bollingen Foundation.

External links

 Library resources about

Medieval Latin

* * *

Online books

Resources in your library

Resources in other libraries

In-depth Guides to Learning Latin at the UK National Archives.

The Journal of Medieval Latin

Wright, Thomas, ed. A Selection of Latin Stories, from Manuscripts of the Thirteenth and Founteenth Centuries: A Contribution to the History of Fiction During the Middle Ages. (London: The Percy Society. 1842.)

Corpus Corporum (mlat.uzh.ch)

Corpus Thomisticum (corpusthomisticum.org)

LacusCurtius (penelope.uchicago.edu)

v

t

e

Ages of Latin

until 75 BC

Old Latin

75 BC – 200 AD

Classical Latin

200–900

Late Latin

900–1300

Medieval Latin

1300–1500

Renaissance Latin

1500–1900

New Latin

1900–present

Contemporary Latin

History of Latin

Latin literature

Vulgar Latin

Ecclesiastical Latin

Romance languages

Latino sine flexione

Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum

Hiberno-Latin

Judeo-Latin

v

t

e

Ancient Rome topics

Outline

Timeline

Epochs

Foundation

Kingdom
overthrow

Republic

Empire 
Pax Romana

Principate

Dominate

Western Empire
fall

historiography of the fall

Byzantine Empire
decline

fall

Constitution 
History

Kingdom

Republic

Empire

Late Empire

Senate

Legislative assemblies
Curiate

Centuriate

Tribal

Plebeian

Executive magistrates

SPQR

Law 
Twelve Tables

Mos maiorum

Citizenship

Auctoritas

Imperium

Status

Litigation

Government 
Curia

Forum

Cursus honorum

Collegiality

Emperor

Legatus

Dux

Officium

Prefect

Vicarius

Vigintisexviri

Lictor

Magister militum

Imperator

Princeps senatus

Pontifex Maximus

Augustus

Caesar

Tetrarch

Optimates

Populares

Province

Magistrates

Ordinary 
Consul

Censor

Praetor

Tribune

Tribune of the Plebs

Military tribune

Quaestor

Aedile

Promagistrate

Governor

Extraordinary 
Rex

Interrex

Dictator

Magister Equitum

Decemviri

Consular Tribune

Triumvir

Military 
History

Borders

Establishment

Structure

Campaigns

Political control

Strategy

Engineering

Frontiers and fortifications
castra

Technology

Army
Legion

Infantry tactics

Personal equipment

Siege engines

Navy

Auxiliaries

Decorations and punishments

Hippika gymnasia

Economy 
Agriculture

Deforestation

Commerce

Finance

Currency

Republican currency

Imperial currency

Culture 
Architecture

Art

Bathing

Calendar

Clothing

Cosmetics

Cuisine

Hairstyles

Education

Literature

Music

Mythology

Religion
Deities

Romanization

Roman people

Sexuality

Theatre

Wine

Society 
Patricians

Plebs

Conflict of the Orders

Secessio plebis

Equites

Gens

Tribes
Assembly

Naming conventions

Demography

Women

Marriage

Adoption

Slavery

Bagaudae

Technology 
Amphitheatres

Aqueducts

Bridges

Circuses

Civil engineering

Concrete

Domes

Metallurgy

Numerals

Roads

Temples

Theatres

Sanitation

Thermae

Latin 
History

Alphabet

Versions
Old

Classical

Vulgar

Late

Medieval

Renaissance

New

Contemporary

Ecclesiastical

Romance languages

Writers

Latin 
Aelius Donatus

Ammianus Marcellinus

Appuleius

Asconius Pedianus

Augustine

Aurelius Victor

Ausonius

Boëthius

Caesar

Catullus

Cassiodorus

Censorinus

Cicero

Claudian

Columella

Cornelius Nepos

Ennius

Eutropius

Fabius Pictor

Sextus Pompeius Festus

Rufus Festus

Florus

Frontinus

Fronto

Fulgentius

Gellius

Horace

Hydatius

Hyginus

Jerome

Jordanes

Julius Paulus

Justin

Juvenal

Lactantius

Livy

Lucan

Lucretius

Macrobius

Marcellus Empiricus

Marcus Aurelius

Manilius

Martial

Nicolaus Damascenus

Nonius Marcellus

Obsequens

Orosius

Ovid

Petronius

Phaedrus

Plautus

Pliny the Elder

Pliny the Younger

Pomponius Mela

Priscian

Propertius

Quadrigarius

Quintilian

Quintus Curtius Rufus

Sallust

Seneca the Elder

Seneca the Younger

Servius

Sidonius Apollinaris

Silius Italicus

Statius

Suetonius

Symmachus

Tacitus

Terence

Tertullian

Tibullus

Valerius Antias

Valerius Maximus

Varro

Velleius Paterculus

Verrius Flaccus

Vergil

Vitruvius

Greek 
Aelian

Aëtius of Amida

Appian

Arrian

Cassius Dio

Diodorus Siculus

Diogenes Laërtius

Dionysius of Halicarnassus

Dioscorides

Eusebius of Caesaria

Galen

Herodian

Josephus

Julian

Libanius

Lucian

Pausanias

Philostratus

Phlegon of Tralles

Photius

Plutarch

Polyaenus

Polybius

Porphyrius

Priscus

Procopius

Simplicius of Cilicia

Sozomen

Stephanus Byzantinus

Strabo

Themistius

Theodoret

Zonaras

Zosimus

Major cities 
Alexandria

Antioch

Aquileia

Berytus

Bononia

Carthage

Constantinopolis

Eboracum

Leptis Magna

Londinium

Lutetia

Mediolanum

Pompeii

Ravenna

Roma

Smyrna

Vindobona

Volubilis

Lists and other

topics 
Cities and towns

Climate

Consuls

Dictators

Distinguished women

Dynasties

Emperors

Generals

Gentes

Geographers

Institutions

Laws

Legacy

Legions

Magistri equitum

Nomina

Pontifices Maximi

Praetors

Quaestors

Tribunes

Roman–Iranian relations

Wars and battles

Fiction

Films

Authority control 
NKC: ph126229

Languages portal
