"Protest against racial segregation

Montgomery bus boycott

Part of the Civil Rights Movement

Rosa Parks on a Montgomery bus on December 21, 1956, the day Montgomery's public transportation system was legally integrated. Behind Parks is Nicholas C. Chriss, a UPI reporter covering the event.

Date December 5, 1955 – December 20, 1956 (1 year and 16 days)

Location Montgomery, Alabama

Caused by 
Racial segregation on public transportation

Successful 6-day Baton Rouge bus boycott

Claudette Colvin arrested

Rosa Parks arrested

Resulted in 
Browder v. Gayle (1956)

Emergence of Martin Luther King Jr.

Inspired Tallahassee bus boycott

Formation of Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)

Parties to the civil conflict

Women's Political Council (WPC)

Montgomery Improvement Association (MIA)

City Commission of Montgomery

National City Lines

Montgomery City Lines

Montgomery Citizens Council

Lead figures

 WPC member
Jo Ann Robinson

MIA members

Martin Luther King Jr.

E.D. Nixon

Rosa Parks

Fred Gray

City Commission
W. A. Gayle, President of the Commission (mayor)

Frank Parks, Commissioner

Clyde Sellers, Police Commissioner

National City Lines

Kenneth E. Totten, vice president

Montgomery City Lines

J.H. Bagley, manager

Jack Crenshaw, attorney

James F. Blake, bus driver

v

t

e

Civil Rights Movement

Prelude
Bombingham

Journey of Reconciliation

Murder of Harry and Harriette Moore

1953-1959

Baton Rouge bus boycott

Montgomery bus boycott

Tallahassee bus boycott

Mansfield school desegregation incident

Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom

Royal Ice Cream sit-in

Little Rock Nine

Dockum Drug Store sit-in

Katz Drug Store sit-in

Kissing Case

Biloxi wade-ins

1960-1963

Tent City

Greensboro sit-ins

Nashville sit-ins

Sit-in movement

Freedom Riders

New Orleans school desegregation crisis

Albany Movement

Cambridge Movement

Ole Miss riot of 1962

Birmingham campaign

Bloody Monday

Stand in the Schoolhouse Door

Leesburg Stockade

March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom

St. Augustine movement
1964 Monson Motor Lodge protest

Chicago Public Schools boycott

Black Christmas

1964-1968

Chester School Protests

Bloody Tuesday

Freedom Summer

Murders of Chaney, Goodman, and Schwerner

Carpenters for Christmas

Selma to Montgomery marches

Seattle school boycott of 1966

March Against Fear

Chicago Freedom Movement

Orangeburg massacre

Memphis sanitation strike

Assassination of Martin Luther King Jr.

St. Petersburg sanitation strike of 1968

Poor People's Campaign

v

t

e

Civil Rights Movement in Alabama

Bombingham

Montgomery bus boycott

Stand in the Schoolhouse Door

Birmingham campaign

Birmingham riot of 1963

16th Street Baptist Church bombing

Bloody Tuesday

Selma to Montgomery marches

The Montgomery bus boycott was a political and social protest campaign against the policy of racial segregation on the public transit system of Montgomery, Alabama. It was a seminal event in the civil rights movement. The campaign lasted from December 5, 1955 — the Monday after Rosa Parks, an African-American woman, was arrested for refusing to surrender her seat to a white person — to December 20, 1956, when the federal ruling Browder v. Gayle took effect, and led to a United States Supreme Court decision that declared the Alabama and Montgomery laws that segregated buses were unconstitutional.

Contents

1 Background

1.1 Morgan v. Virginia decision

1.2 Baton Rouge bus boycott

1.3 Arrest of Claudette Colvin

1.4 Murder of Emmett Till

1.5 Keys v. Carolina Coach Co. decision

2 History

2.1 Rosa Parks

2.2 President E. D. Nixon

2.3 Boycott

2.4 Victory

3 Aftermath

4 Participants

4.1 People

4.2 Organizations

5 See also

6 References

7 Further reading

8 External links

Background

Prior to the bus boycott, Jim Crow laws mandated the racial segregation of the Montgomery Bus Line. As a result of this segregation African Americans were not hired as drivers, were forced to ride in the back of the bus, and were frequently ordered to surrender their seats to white people even though black passengers made up 75% of the bus system's riders.

African-American passengers were also attacked and shortchanged by bus drivers in addition to being left stranded after paying their fares. A number of reasons have been given for why bus drivers acted in this manner, including racism, frustrations over labor disputes and labor conditions, and increased animosity towards blacks in reaction to the 1954 Brown v. Board of Education decision, with many of the drivers joining the White Citizens Councils as a result of the decision.

The boycott also took place within a larger statewide and national movement for civil rights, including court cases such as Morgan v. Virginia, the earlier Baton Rouge bus boycott, and the arrest of Claudette Colvin for refusing to give up her seat on a Montgomery bus.

Morgan v. Virginia decision

Main article: Morgan v. Virginia

The NAACP had accepted and litigated other cases, including that of Irene Morgan in 1946, which resulted in a victory in the U.S. Supreme Court on the grounds that segregated interstate bus lines violated the Commerce Clause. That victory, however, overturned state segregation laws only insofar as they applied to travel in interstate commerce, such as interstate bus travel, and Southern bus companies immediately circumvented the Morgan ruling by instituting their own Jim Crow regulations. Further incidents continued to take place in Montgomery, including the arrest for disorderly conduct in May 1951 of Lillie Mae Bradford, who refused to leave the white passengers' section until the bus driver corrected an incorrect charge on her transfer ticket.

Baton Rouge bus boycott

Main article: Baton Rouge bus boycott

On February 25, 1953, the Baton Rouge, Louisiana city-parish council passed Ordinance 222, after the city saw protesting from African-Americans when the council raised the city's bus fares. The ordinance abolished race-based reserved seating requirements and allowed the admission of African-Americans in the front sections of city buses if there were no white passengers present, but still required African-Americans to enter from the rear, rather than the front of the buses. However, the ordinance was largely unenforced by the city bus drivers. The drivers later went on strike after city authorities refused to arrest Rev. T.J. Jemison for sitting in a front row. Four days after the strike began, Louisiana Attorney General and former Baton Rouge mayor Fred S. LeBlanc declared the ordinance unconstitutional under Louisiana state law. This led Rev. Jemison to organize what historians believe to be the first bus boycott of the civil rights movement. The boycott ended after eight days when an agreement was reached to only retain the first two front and back rows as racially reserved seating areas.

Arrest of Claudette Colvin

Main article: Claudette Colvin

Black activists had begun to build a case to challenge state bus segregation laws around the arrest of a 15-year-old girl, Claudette Colvin, a student at Booker T. Washington High School in Montgomery. On March 2, 1955, Colvin was handcuffed, arrested and forcibly removed from a public bus when she refused to give up her seat to a white man. At the time, Colvin was an active member in the NAACP Youth Council; Rosa Parks was an advisor. Colvin's legal case formed the core of Browder v. Gayle, which ended the Montgomery bus boycott when the Supreme Court ruled on it in December 1956.

Murder of Emmett Till

Main article: Emmett Till

In August 1955, merely four months before Parks' refusal to give up a seat on the bus that led to the Montgomery bus boycott, a 14-year-old boy from Chicago named Emmett Till was murdered by two white men, John W. Milam and Roy Bryant. The picture of his brutally beaten body in the open-casket funeral that his mother requested was widely publicized, specifically by the weekly newspaper Jet, which circulated to much of the black community in the Deep South. His killers' acquittal generated massive outrage, both domestically and internationally, and they subsequently admitted they had indeed murdered the boy in an interview on January 24, 1956, published in Look magazine.

Keys v. Carolina Coach Co. decision

Main article: Keys v. Carolina Coach Co.

In November 1955, just three weeks before Parks' defiance of Jim Crow laws in Montgomery, the Interstate Commerce Commission, in response to a complaint filed by Women's Army Corps private Sarah Keys, closed the legal loophole left by the Morgan ruling in a landmark case known as Keys v. Carolina Coach Co.. The ICC prohibited individual carriers from imposing their own segregation rules on interstate travelers, declaring that to do so was a violation of the anti-discrimination provision of the Interstate Commerce Act. But neither the Supreme Court's Morgan ruling nor the ICC's Keys ruling addressed the matter of Jim Crow travel within the individual states.

History

Under the system of segregation used on Montgomery buses, the ten front seats were reserved for whites at all times. The ten back seats were supposed to be reserved for blacks at all times. The middle section of the bus consisted of sixteen unreserved seats for whites and blacks on a segregated basis. Whites filled the middle seats from the front to back, and blacks filled seats from the back to front until the bus was full. If other black people boarded the bus, they were required to stand. If another white person boarded the bus, then everyone in the black row nearest the front had to get up and stand, so that a new row for white people could be created; it was illegal for whites and blacks to sit next to each other. When Rosa Parks refused to give up her seat for a white person, she was sitting in the first row of the middle section.

Often when boarding the buses, black people were required to pay at the front, get off, and reenter the bus through a separate door at the back. Occasionally, bus drivers would drive away before black passengers were able to reboard. National City Lines owned the Montgomery Bus Line at the time of the Montgomery bus boycott. Under the leadership of Walter Reuther, the United Auto Workers donated almost $5,000 (equivalent to $48,000 in 2019) to the boycott's organizing committee.

Rosa Parks

Main article: Rosa Parks

Rosa Parks being fingerprinted by Deputy Sheriff D.H. Lackey after her arrest for boycotting public transportation

Rosa Parks (February 4, 1913 – October 24, 2005) was a seamstress by profession; she was also the secretary for the Montgomery chapter of the NAACP. Twelve years before her history-making arrest, Parks was stopped from boarding a city bus by driver James F. Blake, who ordered her to board at the back door and then drove off without her. Parks vowed never again to ride a bus driven by Blake. As a member of the NAACP, Parks was an investigator assigned to cases of sexual assault. In 1945, she was sent to Abbeville, Alabama, to investigate the gang rape of Recy Taylor. The protest that arose around the Taylor case was the first instance of a nationwide civil rights protest, and it laid the groundwork for the Montgomery bus boycott.

A diagram showing where Rosa Parks sat in the unreserved section at the time of her arrest

In 1955, Parks completed a course in "Race Relations" at the Highlander Folk School in Tennessee, where nonviolent civil disobedience had been discussed as a tactic. On December 1, 1955, Parks was sitting in the foremost row in which black people could sit (in the middle section). When a white man boarded the bus, the bus driver told everyone in her row to move back. At that moment, Parks realized that she was again on a bus driven by Blake. While all of the other black people in her row complied, Parks refused, and she was arrested for failing to obey the driver's seat assignments, as city ordinances did not explicitly mandate segregation but did give the bus driver authority to assign seats. Found guilty on December 5, Parks was fined $10 plus a court cost of $4 (combined total equivalent to $134 in 2019), and she appealed.

President E. D. Nixon

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Some action against segregation had been in the works for some time before Parks' arrest, under the leadership of E. D. Nixon, president of the local NAACP chapter and a member of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters. Nixon intended that her arrest be a test case to allow Montgomery's black citizens to challenge segregation on the city's public buses. With this goal, community leaders had been waiting for the right person to be arrested, a person who would anger the black community into action, who would agree to test the segregation laws in court, and who, most importantly, was "above reproach". When Colvin was arrested in March 1955, Nixon thought he had found the perfect person, but the teenager turned out to be pregnant. Nixon later explained, "I had to be sure that I had somebody I could win with." Parks was a good candidate because of her employment and marital status, along with her good standing in the community.

Between Parks' arrest and trial, Nixon organized a meeting of local ministers at Martin Luther King Jr.'s church. Though Nixon could not attend the meeting because of his work schedule, he arranged that no election of a leader for the proposed boycott would take place until his return. When he returned, he caucused with Ralph Abernathy and Rev. E.N. French to name the association to lead the boycott to the city (they selected the "Montgomery Improvement Association", "MIA"), and they selected King (Nixon's choice) to lead the boycott. Nixon wanted King to lead the boycott because the young minister was new to Montgomery and the city fathers had not had time to intimidate him. At a subsequent, larger meeting of ministers, Nixon's agenda was threatened by the clergymen's reluctance to support the campaign. Nixon was indignant, pointing out that their poor congregations worked to put money into the collection plates so these ministers could live well, and when those congregations needed the clergy to stand up for them, those comfortable ministers refused to do so. Nixon threatened to reveal the ministers' cowardice to the black community, and King spoke up, denying he was afraid to support the boycott. King agreed to lead the MIA, and Nixon was elected its treasurer.

Boycott

The National City Lines bus, No. 2857, on which Rosa Parks rode before she was arrested (a GM "old-look" transit bus, serial number 1132), is now on exhibit at the Henry Ford Museum.

On the night of Rosa Parks' arrest, the Women's Political Council, led by Jo Ann Robinson, printed and circulated a flyer throughout Montgomery's black community that read as follows:

Another woman has been arrested and thrown in jail because she refused to get up out of her seat on the bus for a white person to sit down. It is the second time since the Claudette Colvin case that a Negro woman has been arrested for the same thing. This has to be stopped. Negroes have rights too, for if Negroes did not ride the buses, they could not operate. Three-fourths of the riders are Negro, yet we are arrested, or have to stand over empty seats. If we do not do something to stop these arrests, they will continue. The next time it may be you, or your daughter, or mother. This woman's case will come up on Monday. We are, therefore, asking every Negro to stay off the buses Monday in protest of the arrest and trial. Don't ride the buses to work, to town, to school, or anywhere on Monday. You can afford to stay out of school for one day if you have no other way to go except by bus. You can also afford to stay out of town for one day. If you work, take a cab, or walk. But please, children and grown-ups, don't ride the bus at all on Monday. Please stay off all buses Monday.

The next morning there was a meeting led by the new MIA head, King, where a group of 16 to 18 people gathered at the Mt. Zion Church to discuss boycott strategies. At that time Rosa Parks was introduced but not asked to speak, despite a standing ovation and calls from the crowd for her to speak; she asked someone if she should say something, but they replied, "Why, you've said enough." A citywide boycott of public transit was proposed to demand a fixed dividing line for the segregated sections of the buses. Such a line would have meant that if the white section of the bus was oversubscribed, whites would have to stand; blacks would not be forced to give up their seats to whites.

This demand was a compromise for the leaders of the boycott, who believed that the city of Montgomery would be more likely to accept it rather than a demand for a full integration of the buses. In this respect, the MIA leaders followed the pattern of 1950s boycott campaigns in the Deep South, including the successful boycott a few years earlier of service stations in Mississippi for refusing to provide restrooms for blacks. The organizer of that campaign, T. R. M. Howard of the Regional Council of Negro Leadership, had spoken on the lynching of Emmett Till as King's guest at the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church only four days before Parks's arrest. Parks was in the audience and later said that Emmett Till was on her mind when she refused to give up her seat.

The MIA's demand for a fixed dividing line was to be supplemented by a requirement that all bus passengers receive courteous treatment by bus operators, be seated on a first-come, first-served basis, and that blacks be employed as bus drivers. The proposal was passed, and the boycott was to commence the following Monday. To publicize the impending boycott it was advertised at black churches throughout Montgomery the following Sunday.

On Saturday, December 3, it was evident that the black community would support the boycott, and very few blacks rode the buses that day. On December 5, a mass meeting was held at the Holt Street Baptist Church to determine if the protest would continue. Given twenty minutes notice, King gave a speech asking for a bus boycott and attendees enthusiastically agreed. Starting December 7, J Edgar Hoover's FBI noted the "agitation among negroes" and tried to find "derogatory information" about King.

The boycott proved extremely effective, with enough riders lost to the city transit system to cause serious economic distress. Martin Luther King later wrote " miracle had taken place." Instead of riding buses, boycotters organized a system of carpools, with car owners volunteering their vehicles or themselves driving people to various destinations. Some white housewives also drove their black domestic servants to work. When the city pressured local insurance companies to stop insuring cars used in the carpools, the boycott leaders arranged policies at Lloyd's of London.

Black taxi drivers charged ten cents per ride, a fare equal to the cost to ride the bus, in support of the boycott. When word of this reached city officials on December 8, the order went out to fine any cab driver who charged a rider less than 45 cents. In addition to using private motor vehicles, some people used non-motorized means to get around, such as cycling, walking, or even riding mules or driving horse-drawn buggies. Some people also hitchhiked. During rush hours, sidewalks were often crowded. As the buses received few, if any, passengers, their officials asked the City Commission to allow stopping service to black communities. Across the nation, black churches raised money to support the boycott and collected new and slightly used shoes to replace the tattered footwear of Montgomery's black citizens, many of whom walked everywhere rather than ride the buses and submit to Jim Crow laws.

In response, opposing whites swelled the ranks of the White Citizens' Council, the membership of which doubled during the course of the boycott. The councils sometimes resorted to violence: King's and Abernathy's houses were firebombed, as were four black Baptist churches. Boycotters were often physically attacked. After the attack at King's house, he gave a speech to the 300 angry African Americans who had gathered outside. He said:

If you have weapons, take them home; if you do not have them, please do not seek to get them. We cannot solve this problem through retaliatory violence. We must meet violence with nonviolence. Remember the words of Jesus: "He who lives by the sword will perish by the sword". We must love our white brothers, no matter what they do to us. We must make them know that we love them. Jesus still cries out in words that echo across the centuries: "Love your enemies; bless them that curse you; pray for them that despitefully use you". This is what we must live by. We must meet hate with love. Remember, if I am stopped, this movement will not stop, because God is with the movement. Go home with this glowing faith and this radiant assurance.

Lydia and 88 other boycott leaders and carpool drivers were indicted for conspiring to interfere with a business under a 1921 ordinance. Rather than wait to be arrested, they turned themselves in as an act of defiance.

King was ordered to pay a $500 fine or serve 386 days in jail. He ended up spending two weeks in jail. The move backfired by bringing national attention to the protest. King commented on the arrest by saying: "I was proud of my crime. It was the crime of joining my people in a nonviolent protest against injustice."

Also important during the bus boycott were grass-roots activist groups that helped to catalyze both fund-raising and morale. Groups such as the Club from Nowhere helped to sustain the boycott by finding new ways of raising money and offering support to boycott participants. Many members of these organizations were women and their contributions to the effort have been described by some as essential to the success of the bus boycott.

Victory

Smithsonian Institution traveling exhibition "381 Days: The Montgomery Bus Boycott" at the Washington State History Museum

Pressure increased across the country. The related civil suit was heard in federal district court and, on June 5, 1956, the court ruled in Browder v. Gayle (1956) that Alabama's racial segregation laws for buses were unconstitutional. As the state appealed the decision, the boycott continued. The case moved on to the United States Supreme Court. On November 13, 1956, the Supreme Court upheld the district court's ruling that segregation on public buses and transportation was against the law.

The boycott officially ended December 20, 1956, after 381 days. The city passed an ordinance authorizing black bus passengers to sit virtually anywhere they chose on buses. The Montgomery bus boycott resounded far beyond the desegregation of public buses. It stimulated activism and participation from the South in the national Civil Rights Movement and gave King national attention as a rising leader.

Aftermath

White backlash against the court victory was quick, brutal, and, in the short-term, effective. Two days after the inauguration of desegregated seating, someone fired a shotgun through the front door of Martin Luther King's home. A day later, on Christmas Eve, white men attacked a black teenager as she exited a bus. Four days after that, two buses were fired upon by snipers. In one sniper incident, a pregnant woman was shot in both legs. On January 10, 1957, bombs destroyed five black churches and the home of Reverend Robert S. Graetz, one of the few white Montgomerians who had publicly sided with the MIA.

The City suspended bus service for several weeks on account of the violence. According to legal historian Randall Kennedy, "When the violence subsided and service was restored, many black Montgomerians enjoyed their newly recognized right only abstractly ... In practically every other setting, Montgomery remained overwhelmingly segregated ..." On January 23, a group of Klansmen (who would later be charged for the bombings) lynched a black man, Willie Edwards, on the pretext that he was dating a white woman.

The City's elite moved to strengthen segregation in other areas, and in March 1957 passed an ordinance making it "unlawful for white and colored persons to play together, or, in company with each other ... in any game of cards, dice, dominoes, checkers, pool, billiards, softball, basketball, baseball, football, golf, track, and at swimming pools, beaches, lakes or ponds or any other game or games or athletic contests, either indoors or outdoors."

Later in the year, Montgomery police charged seven Klansmen with the bombings, but all of the defendants were acquitted. About the same time, the Alabama Supreme Court ruled against Martin Luther King's appeal of his "illegal boycott" conviction. Rosa Parks left Montgomery due to death threats and employment blacklisting. According to Charles Silberman, "by 1963, most Negroes in Montgomery had returned to the old custom of riding in the back of the bus."

The National Memorial for Peace and Justice contains, among other things, a sculpture "dedicated to the women who sustained the Montgomery Bus Boycott", by Dana King, to help illustrate the civil rights period. The memorial opened in downtown Montgomery, Alabama on April 26, 2018.

Participants

People

Ralph Abernathy

Hugo Black

James F. Blake

Aurelia Browder

Mary Fair Burks

Johnnie Carr

Claudette Colvin

Clifford Durr

Mildred Fahrni

Georgia Gilmore

Robert Graetz

Fred Gray

Grover C. Hall, Jr.

Coretta Scott King

Martin Luther King Jr.

Theodora Lacey

Edgar Nixon

Rosa Parks

Mother Pollard

Jo Ann Robinson

Bayard Rustin

Nate Singleton

Glenn Smiley

Mary Louise Smith

Organizations

Committee for Nonviolent Integration

Fellowship of Reconciliation

Georgia Gilmore

Men of Montgomery

Montgomery Improvement Association

National Association for the Advancement of Colored People

Women's Political Council

See also

1957 Alexandra Bus Boycott

Boycott (2001 film)

Bristol Bus Boycott, 1963

Jim Crow laws

The Legacy Museum

The Long Walk Home (1990 film)

Martin Luther King and the Montgomery Story

Rosa Parks Act

Rosa Parks Museum

1950s portal

United States portal

References

^ "Montgomery Bus Boycott". Civil Rights Movement Veterans.

^ Gallagher, Charles A.; Lippard, Cameron D., eds. (2014). Race and Racism in the United States: An Encyclopedia of the American Mosaic. ABC-CLIO. p. 807. ISBN 9781440803468.

^ Lipsitz, George (2011). How Racism Takes Place. Temple University Press. p. 68. ISBN 9781439902578.

^ Smith, Bonnie G., ed. (2008). "The Oxford Encyclopedia of Women in World History, Volume 1". Oxford University Press. p. 396.

^ Shultziner, Doron (2013). "The Social-Psychological Origins of the Montgomery Bus Boycott: Social Interaction and Humiliation in the Emergence of Social Movements". Mobilization: An International Quarterly. 18 (2): 117–142. doi:10.17813/maiq.18.2.83123352476r2x82.

^ United States Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration (October 17, 2013). "The Road to Civil Rights: Journey of Reconciliation". dot.gov.

^ Public Broadcasting Service (2002). "The Rise and Fall of Jim Crow: MORGAN v. Virginia (1946)". pbs.org.

^ McCabe, Katie; Roundtree, Dovey Johnson (2009). Justice Older Than the Law: The Life of Dovey Johnson Roundtree. University Press of Mississippi. p. 103. ISBN 978-1617031212.

^ Borger, Julian (April 3, 2006). "Civil rights heroes may get pardons". The Guardian. Retrieved March 23, 2017.

^ a b Dr. Mary Price; Louisiana State University (December 1, 2013). "Baton Rouge Bus Boycott". lsu.edu.

^ a b Julio Alicea; Swarthmore College (December 9, 2010). "African American passengers boycott segregated buses in Baton Rouge, 1953". swarthmore.edu.

^ Nikki L. M. Brown, Barry M. Stentiford (2008). The Jim Crow Encyclopedia: Greenwood Milestones in African American History. p. 66. ISBN 978-0313341816.

^ Debbie Elliott; National Public Radio (June 19, 2003). "The First Civil Rights Bus Boycott". npr.org.

^ Garrow, David J. (1985). "The Origins of the Montgomery Bus Boycott". Journal of the Southern Regional Council. Emory University. 7 (5): 24. Archived from the original on July 14, 2010.

^ Crowe, Chris. (2003). Getting away with murder : the true story of the Emmett Till case. New York: Phyllis Fogelman Books. ISBN 0803728042. OCLC 49699347.

^ Alison Shay; University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (November 7, 2012). "Remembering Sarah Keys". unc.edu. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013.

^ Browder v. Gayle, 142 F. Supp. 707 (1956)

^ "Smithsonian Source". www.smithsoniansource.org.

^ Garrow (1986) p. 13. David Garrow wrote, "Mrs.  Parks once told ... how she had been physically thrown off a bus some ten years earlier when, after paying her fare at the front of the bus, she had refused to get off and reenter by the back door -- a custom often inflicted on black riders."

^ William J. Cooper, Jr., Thomas E. Terrill, The American South: A History, Volume II, 4 ed., Rowman and Littlefield, 2009, p. 730.

^ The company was sold to the City of Montgomery in 1974 and become the Montgomery Area Transit System

^ Boyle, Kevin (November 21, 1995). The UAW and the Heyday of American Liberalism, 1945–1968. Cornell University Press. p. 121. ISBN 978-1-5017-1327-9.

^ McGuire, Danielle L. (2010). At the Dark End of the Street: Black Women, Rape, and Resistance- A New History of the Civil Rights Movement from Rosa Parks to the Rise of Black Power. Random House. p. 8 and 39. ISBN 978-0-307-26906-5.

^ "Rosa Park's arrest report" (PDF). December 1, 1955. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 22, 2015. Retrieved March 3, 2016.

^ "Parks, Rosa Louise." Encyclopedia Americana. Grolier Online (accessed May 8, 2009).

^ a b Feeney, Mark (October 25, 2005). "Rosa Parks, civil rights icon, dead at 92 - The Boston Globe". Boston.com. Retrieved September 28, 2012.

^ "Leaflet, "Don't Ride the Bus", Come to a Mass Meeting on 5 December". Mlk-kpp01.stanford.edu. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved June 5, 2014.

^ Crosby, Emilye (2011). Civil Rights History from the Ground Up: Local Struggles, a National Movement - Google Books. ISBN 9780820338651. Retrieved June 5, 2014.

^ Beito, David T.; Beito, Linda Royster (2009). Black Maverick: T.R.M. Howard's Fight for Civil Rights and Economic Power. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

^ Jakoubek, Robert (1989). Martin Luther King, Jr. Civil Rights Leader. Philadelphia: Chelsea House Publishers. p. 49.

^ Phibbs, Cheryl Fisher (2009). The Montgomery Bus Boycott: A History and Reference Guide. ABC-CLIO. p. 19. ISBN 9780313358876.

^ Martin Luther King. "Address to the first Montgomery Improvement Association (MIA) Mass Meeting". Stanford University. Archived from the original on December 6, 2013. Retrieved December 3, 2013.

^ "To J.Edgar Hoover from Special Agent in Charge". Stanford University. Archived from the original on December 7, 2013. Retrieved December 3, 2013.

^ Finkleman, Paul (2009). Encyclopedia of African American History, 1896 to the Present. Oxford University Press. p. 360. ISBN 9780195167795.

^ "Montgomery Bus Boycott: The story of Rosa Parks and the Civil Rights Movement". Montgomeryboycott.com. Retrieved September 28, 2012.

^ Darby, Jean (1990). Martin Luther King, Jr. Minneapolis: Lerner Publishing Group. pp. 41–42. ISBN 0-8225-4902-6.

^ "Montgomery, Ala., Bus Boycott" (PDF). Retrieved September 28, 2012.

^ "State of Alabama v. M. L. King, Jr., Nos. 7399 and 9593". kinginstitute.stanford.edu. July 7, 2017. Retrieved December 4, 2019.

^ "The Life and Words of Martin Luther King, Jr. (Part 1 of 2) | Scholastic.com". Teacher.scholastic.com. Retrieved September 28, 2012.

^ McGuire, Danielle (2010). At the Dark End of the Stree. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. pp. 96–97. ISBN 978-0-307-26906-5.

^ Blackside, Inc. "Interview with Georgia Gilmore, conducted by Blackside, Inc. on February 17, 1986, for Eyes on the Prize: America's Civil Rights Years (1954-1965)". Washington University Libraries, Film and Media Archive, Henry Hampton Collection. Retrieved November 26, 2011.

^ McGuire, Danielle (2010). At the Dark End of the Street. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-307-26906-5.

^ a b "381 Days: The Montgomery Bus Boycott Story". sites.si.edu. Smithsonian Institution. Archived from the original on March 16, 2011. Retrieved March 31, 2016.

^ "Browder v. Gayle, 142 F. Supp. 707 (M.D. Ala. 1956)". Justia US law. Retrieved June 23, 2020.

^ "Gayle v. Browder". Oyez. Retrieved June 27, 2020.

^ Wright, H. R: The Birth of the Montgomery Bus Boycott, page 123. Charro Book Co., Inc., 1991. ISBN 0-9629468-0-X

^ McAdam, Doug (December 1983). "Tactical Innovation and the Pace of Insurgency". American Sociological Review. 48 (6): 735–54. doi:10.2307/2095322. JSTOR 2095322. S2CID 62832487.

^ Thornton, J. Mills (2006). Dividing Lines:Municipal Politics and the Struggle for Civil Rights in Montgomery, Birmingham, and Selma. University of Alabama Press. pp. 111–2.

^ "Overview". www.montgomeryboycott.com.

^ a b c Kennedy, Randall (April 1989). "Martin Luther King's Constitution: A Legal History of the Montgomery Bus Boycott". The Yale Law Journal. 98 (6): 999–1067. doi:10.2307/796572. JSTOR 796572.

^ Thornton, J. Mills (2006). Dividing Lines:Municipal Politics and the Struggle for Civil Rights in Montgomery, Birmingham, and Selma. University of Alabama Press. p. 94.

^ Branch, Taylor (1988). Parting the Waters: America in the King Years 1954-1963. Simon and Schuster. p. 202.

^ Theoharis, Jeanne (February 4, 2013). "10 Things You Don't Know About Rosa Parks". Huffington Post.

^ Silberman, Charles E. (1964). Crisis in Black and White. Random House. pp. 141–2.

^ Wright, Barnett (April 19, 2018). "What's inside Montgomery's national peace and slave memorial museum opening April 26". Birmingham Times. Retrieved April 21, 2018.

^ "The National Memorial for Peace and Justice". Legacy Museum and National Memorial for Peace and Justice.

^ Campbell Robertson (April 25, 2018). "A Lynching Memorial Is Opening. The Country Has Never Seen Anything Like It". New York Times.

^ Pitsula, James M. (Spring 2003). "Reviewed Work: No Plaster Saint: The Life of Mildred Osterhout Fahrni by Nancy Knickerbocker". Labour / Le Travail. Vancouver, Canada: Canadian Committee on Labour History and Athabasca University Press. 51: 282–284. doi:10.2307/25149348. JSTOR 25149348.

Further reading

Berg, Allison, "Trauma and Testimony in Black Women's Civil Rights Memoirs: The Montgomery Bus Boycott and the Women Who Started It, Warriors Don't Cry, and From the Mississippi ContributionsDelta", Journal of Women's History, 21 (Fall 2009), 84–107.

Branch, Taylor. Parting The Waters: America In The King Years, 1954-63 (1988; New York: Simon & Schuster/Touchstone, 1989). ISBN 0-671-68742-5

Carson, Clayborne, et al., editors, Eyes on The Prize Civil Rights Reader: documents, speeches, and first hand accounts from the black freedom struggle (New York:Penguin Books, 1991). ISBN 0-14-015403-5

Freedman, Russell, "Freedom Walkers: The Story of the Montgomery Bus Boycott"

Garrow, David J. Bearing the Cross: Martin Luther King Jr. and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference. (1986) ISBN 0-394-75623-1

Garrow, David J., editor, The Montgomery Bus Boycott and the Women Who Started It: The Memoir of Jo Ann Gibson Robinson (Knoxville: The University of Tennessee Press, 1987). ISBN 0-87049-527-5

King, Martin Luther, Jr., Stride Toward Freedom. ISBN 0-06-250490-8

Morris, Aldon D., The Origins Of The Civil Rights Movement: Black Communities Organizing For Change (New York: The Free Press, 1984). ISBN 0-02-922130-7

Parks, Rosa (1992). My Story. New York: Dial Books.

Raines, Howell, My Soul Is Rested: The Story Of The Civil Rights Movement In The Deep South. ISBN 0-14-006753-1

Robnett, Belinda. How Long? How Long?: African American Women in the Struggle for Civil Rights. Oxford University Press. (1997) ISBN 978-0195114904

Thornton III, J. Mills. "Challenge and Response in the Montgomery Bus Boycott of 1955–1956." Alabama Review 67.1 (2014): 40-112.

Thornton III, J. Mills. Dividing Lines: Municipal Politics and the Struggle for Civil Rights in Montgomery, Birmingham, and Selma (2002) excerpt

Walsh, Frank, Landmark Events in American History: The Montgomery Bus Boycott.(Williams, Juan, Eyes on The Prize: America's Civil Rights Years, 1954-1965 (New York: Penguin Books, 1988). ISBN 0-14-009653-1

External links

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Montgomery Bus Boycott.

Alabama Civil Rights Collection - Jack Rabin Collection on Alabama Civil Rights and Southern Activists, at Penn State University, includes oral history interviews and materials concerning Montgomery Bus Boycott

Montgomery Bus Boycott article, Encyclopedia of Alabama

Montgomery Bus Boycott - Story of Montgomery Bus Boycott

Encyclopedia entry on the Montgomery Bus Boycott ~ Includes cross-referenced text, historical documents and streaming audio, presented by the King Research Institute at Stanford University

The Montgomery Bus Boycott - African-American History

Montgomery Bus Boycott ~ Civil Rights Movement Veterans

Learning From Rosa Parks, The Indypendent

Montgomery Bus Boycott - Presented by the Montgomery Advertiser

Civil Rights Era Mug Shots, Montgomery County Sheriff's Office, Alabama Department of Archives & History

Martin Luther King and the "Montgomery Story" Comic Book - 1956

Montgomery Bus Boycott Documents Online collection of original boycott documents and articles by participants ~ Civil Rights Movement Veterans.

Montgomery Bus Boycott, Civil Rights Digital Library.

The Boycott, The Rebellious Life of Mrs. Rosa Parks.

v

t

e

Civil rights movement (1950s and 1960s)

Notable

events

(timeline)

Prior to 1954 
Journey of Reconciliation

Murder of Harry and Harriette Moore

Sweatt v. Painter (1950)

McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents (1950)

1954–1959 
Brown v. Board of Education
Bolling v. Sharpe

Briggs v. Elliott

Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward County

Gebhart v. Belton

White America, Inc.

Sarah Keys v. Carolina Coach Company

Emmett Till

Montgomery bus boycott
Browder v. Gayle

Tallahassee bus boycott

Mansfield school desegregation

1957 Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom
"Give Us the Ballot"

Royal Ice Cream sit-in

Little Rock Nine
National Guard blockade

Civil Rights Act of 1957

Kissing Case

Biloxi wade-ins

1960–1963 
New Year's Day March

Greensboro sit-ins

Nashville sit-ins

Sit-in movement

Greenville Eight

Civil Rights Act of 1960

Ax Handle Saturday

Gomillion v. Lightfoot

Boynton v. Virginia

Rock Hill sit-ins

Robert F. Kennedy's Law Day Address

Freedom Rides
attacks

Garner v. Louisiana

Albany Movement

Cambridge movement

University of Chicago sit-ins

"Second Emancipation Proclamation"

Meredith enrollment, Ole Miss riot

"Segregation now, segregation forever"
Stand in the Schoolhouse Door

1963 Birmingham campaign
Letter from Birmingham Jail

Children's Crusade

Birmingham riot

16th Street Baptist Church bombing

John F. Kennedy's speech to the nation on Civil Rights

Detroit Walk to Freedom

March on Washington
"I Have a Dream"

Big Six

St. Augustine movement

1964–1968 
Twenty-fourth Amendment

Chester School Protests

Bloody Tuesday

Freedom Summer
workers' murders

Civil Rights Act of 1964

1965 Selma to Montgomery marches
"How Long, Not Long"

Voting Rights Act of 1965

Harper v. Virginia Board of Elections

March Against Fear

White House Conference on Civil Rights

Chicago Freedom Movement/Chicago open housing movement

Memphis sanitation strike

King assassination
funeral

riots

Poor People's Campaign

Civil Rights Act of 1968
Fair Housing Act

Green v. County School Board of New Kent County

Activist

groups 
Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights

Atlanta Student Movement

Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters

Congress of Racial Equality (CORE)

Committee for Freedom Now

Committee on Appeal for Human Rights

Council for United Civil Rights Leadership

Council of Federated Organizations

Dallas County Voters League

Deacons for Defense and Justice

Georgia Council on Human Relations

Highlander Folk School

Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights

Lowndes County Freedom Organization

Montgomery Improvement Association

Nashville Student Movement

NAACP
Youth Council

Northern Student Movement

National Council of Negro Women

National Urban League

Operation Breadbasket

Regional Council of Negro Leadership

Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)

Southern Regional Council

Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC)

The Freedom Singers

United Auto Workers (UAW)

Wednesdays in Mississippi

Women's Political Council

Activists 
Ralph Abernathy

Victoria Gray Adams

Zev Aelony

Mathew Ahmann

Muhammad Ali

William G. Anderson

Gwendolyn Armstrong

Arnold Aronson

Ella Baker

Marion Barry

Daisy Bates

Harry Belafonte

James Bevel

Claude Black

Gloria Blackwell

Randolph Blackwell

Unita Blackwell

Ezell Blair Jr.

Joanne Bland

Julian Bond

Joseph E. Boone

William Holmes Borders

Amelia Boynton

Raylawni Branch

Stanley Branche

Ruby Bridges

Aurelia Browder

H. Rap Brown

Guy Carawan

Stokely Carmichael

Johnnie Carr

James Chaney

J. L. Chestnut

Colia Lafayette Clark

Ramsey Clark

Septima Clark

Xernona Clayton

Eldridge Cleaver

Kathleen Cleaver

Charles E. Cobb Jr.

Annie Lee Cooper

Dorothy Cotton

Claudette Colvin

Vernon Dahmer

Jonathan Daniels

Joseph DeLaine

Dave Dennis

Annie Devine

Patricia Stephens Due

Joseph Ellwanger

Charles Evers

Medgar Evers

Myrlie Evers-Williams

Chuck Fager

James Farmer

Walter Fauntroy

James Forman

Marie Foster

Golden Frinks

Andrew Goodman

Fred Gray

Jack Greenberg

Dick Gregory

Lawrence Guyot

Prathia Hall

Fannie Lou Hamer

William E. Harbour

Vincent Harding

Dorothy Height

Lola Hendricks

Aaron Henry

Oliver Hill

Donald L. Hollowell

James Hood

Myles Horton

Zilphia Horton

T. R. M. Howard

Ruby Hurley

Jesse Jackson

Jimmie Lee Jackson

Richie Jean Jackson

T. J. Jemison

Esau Jenkins

Barbara Rose Johns

Vernon Johns

Frank Minis Johnson

Clarence Jones

J. Charles Jones

Matthew Jones

Vernon Jordan

Tom Kahn

Clyde Kennard

A. D. King

C.B. King

Coretta Scott King

Martin Luther King Jr.

Martin Luther King Sr.

Bernard Lafayette

James Lawson

Bernard Lee

Sanford R. Leigh

Jim Letherer

Stanley Levison

John Lewis

Viola Liuzzo

Z. Alexander Looby

Joseph Lowery

Clara Luper

Malcolm X

Mae Mallory

Vivian Malone

Thurgood Marshall

Benjamin Mays

Franklin McCain

Charles McDew

Ralph McGill

Floyd McKissick

Joseph McNeil

James Meredith

William Ming

Jack Minnis

Amzie Moore

Cecil B. Moore

Douglas E. Moore

Harriette Moore

Harry T. Moore

William Lewis Moore

Irene Morgan

Bob Moses

William Moyer

Elijah Muhammad

Diane Nash

Charles Neblett

Edgar Nixon

Jack O'Dell

James Orange

Rosa Parks

James Peck

Charles Person

Homer Plessy

Adam Clayton Powell Jr.

Fay Bellamy Powell

Al Raby

Lincoln Ragsdale

A. Philip Randolph

George Raymond

George Raymond Jr.

Bernice Johnson Reagon

Cordell Reagon

James Reeb

Frederick D. Reese

Walter Reuther

Gloria Richardson

David Richmond

Bernice Robinson

Jo Ann Robinson

Bayard Rustin

Bernie Sanders

Michael Schwerner

Cleveland Sellers

Charles Sherrod

Alexander D. Shimkin

Fred Shuttlesworth

Modjeska Monteith Simkins

Glenn E. Smiley

A. Maceo Smith

Kelly Miller Smith

Mary Louise Smith

Maxine Smith

Ruby Doris Smith-Robinson

Charles Kenzie Steele

Hank Thomas

Dorothy Tillman

A. P. Tureaud

Hartman Turnbow

Albert Turner

C. T. Vivian

Wyatt Tee Walker

Hollis Watkins

Walter Francis White

Roy Wilkins

Hosea Williams

Kale Williams

Robert F. Williams

Andrew Young

Whitney Young

Sammy Younge Jr.

James Zwerg

Influences 
Nonviolence
Padayatra

Sermon on the Mount

Mahatma Gandhi
Ahimsa

Satyagraha

The Kingdom of God Is Within You

Frederick Douglass

W. E. B. Du Bois

Mary McLeod Bethune

Related 
Jim Crow laws

Lynching in the United States

Plessy v. Ferguson
Separate but equal

Buchanan v. Warley

Hocutt v. Wilson

Sweatt v. Painter

Hernandez v. Texas

Heart of Atlanta Motel, Inc. v. United States

Katzenbach v. McClung

Loving v. Virginia

African-American women in the movement

Fifth Circuit Four

Brown Chapel

Dexter Avenue Baptist Church

Holt Street Baptist Church

Edmund Pettus Bridge

March on Washington Movement

African-American churches attacked

List of lynching victims in the United States

Freedom Songs
"Kumbaya"

"Keep Your Eyes on the Prize"

"Oh, Freedom"

"This Little Light of Mine"

"We Shall Not Be Moved"

"We Shall Overcome"

Spring Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam
"Beyond Vietnam: A Time to Break Silence"

Watts riots

Voter Education Project

1960s counterculture

Eyes on the Prize

Honoring 
In popular culture

Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial

Birmingham Civil Rights National Monument

Freedom Riders National Monument

Civil Rights Memorial

Other King memorials

Noted

historians 
Taylor Branch

Clayborne Carson

John Dittmer

Michael Eric Dyson

Chuck Fager

Adam Fairclough

David Garrow

David Halberstam

Vincent Harding

Steven F. Lawson

Doug McAdam

Diane McWhorter

Charles M. Payne

Timothy Tyson

Akinyele Umoja

Movement photographers
