"For other uses, see Plaice (disambiguation).

European plaice

American plaice

Plaice is a common name for a group of flatfish that comprises four species: the European, American, Alaskan and scale-eye plaice.

Commercially, the most important plaice is the European. The principal commercial flatfish in Europe, it is also widely fished recreationally, has potential as an aquaculture species, and is kept as an aquarium fish. Also commercially important is the American plaice.

The term plaice (plural plaice) comes from the 14th-century Anglo-French plais. This in turn comes from the late Latin platessa, meaning flatfish, which originated from the Ancient Greek platys, meaning broad.

Contents

1 European plaice

1.1 Culture

2 American plaice

3 Alaska plaice

4 Scale-eye plaice

5 Plaice as a food

6 Current status

7 Notes

8 References

9 External links

European plaice

World catch of European plaice in thousands of tonnes, based on FAO catch data

External image Distribution map for European plaice (The Sea Around Us)

The European plaice (Pleuronectes platessa) is a right-eyed flounder belonging to the family Pleuronectidae. It is a commercially important flatfish that lives on the sandy bottoms of the European shelf. It ranges geographically from the Barents Sea to the Mediterranean. European plaice are characterised by their smooth brown skin, with distinctive red spots and a bony ridge behind the eyes. They feed on polychaetes, crustaceans and bivalves and can be found at depths of up to 200 metres. At night they move into shallow waters to feed and during the day they bury themselves in the sand. Their maximum recorded length is 100 cm (39.4 inches) and maximum reported age 50 years.

Together with sole, European plaice form a group of flatfish that are the most important flatfish in Europe. European plaice have been fished from the North Sea for hundreds of years. They are usually fished from beam trawlers, otter trawlers or seiners. In the Celtic Sea the plaice species is considered overfished.

Comparison of world catch by weight 2007 for European plaice, using FAO catch data

Culture

A smoke cooked plaice is one of the traditional summer time delicacies of Hiiumaa island.

American plaice

World catch of American plaice in thousands of tonnes, based on FAO catch data

External image Distribution map for American plaice (The Sea Around Us)

Like the European plaice, the American plaice is a right eyed flatfish belonging to the family Pleuronectidae. American plaice are an Atlantic species, which range from southern Labrador to Rhode Island. They are also found in Europe, where they are called rough dab or long rough dab. They spawn in the Gulf of Maine, with peak activity in April and May. They are brown or reddish, and are generally smaller than European plaice, with a rougher skin and larger scales. Their maximum recorded length is 82.6 cm (32.5 inches), and maximum reported age 30 years. They are usually found between depths of 90 metres and 250 metres, on sandy bottoms with temperatures between -0.5 and 2.5 °C. They feed on small fishes and invertebrates.

The species is considered by the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization to be overfished, with no signs of recovery. Though they are also currently endangered in Canada due to overfishing, the Canadian government believes the species is abundant. Plaice is the second-most caught flatfish in Canada, accounting for 50 percent of all flatfish caught.

American plaice may be an intermediate host for the nematode parasite Otostrongylus circumlitis, which is a lungworm of seals, primarily affecting animals less than 1 year of age.

Comparison of world catch by weight 2004 for American plaice, using FAO catch data

Alaska plaice

Alaska plaice can live for up to 30 years and grow to 60 centimetres (24 inches) long, but most that get caught are only seven or eight years old, and about 30 cm (12 in).

Most commercial fisheries do not target Alaska plaice, but many are caught as bycatch by commercial trawlers trying to catch other bottom fish. Thus, many Alaska plaice get caught anyway - so much so that, for example, the 2005 total allowable catch in the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands management area (BSAI) was reached before the end of May of that year.

Scale-eye plaice

The scale-eye plaice is a flatfish of the family Pleuronectidae. It is a demersal fish that lives at depths from between 18 metres (59 ft) to 900 metres (3,000 ft). It can reach 46 centimetres (18 in) in length and can weigh up to 1.2 kilograms (2.6 lb). Its native habitat is the northern Pacific, primarily from the Sea of Okhotsk to Japan and Korea, though it is also found in the Bering Sea.

Plaice as a food

In North German and Danish cuisine plaice is one of the most commonly eaten fish. Filleted, battered, and pan-fried plaice is popular hot or cold as an open sandwich topping together with remoulade sauce and lemon slices. Battered plaice can also be served hot with french fries and remoulade sauce as a main dish; this fish and chips variant is commonly available as a children's special in Danish restaurants. Breaded frozen plaice, ready to be baked or fried at home, are readily available in supermarkets. Fresh plaice is also oven-baked.

"The flesh of plaice is white, tender and subtle-flavoured." Plaice is sometimes used as the fish in fish and chips, in countries where the dish is popular.

Current status

Plaice, along with the other major demersal fish in the North Sea such as cod, monkfish and sole, is listed by the ICES as "outside safe biological limits." Moreover, they are growing less quickly now and are rarely older than six years, whereas they can reach forty. The World Wide Fund for Nature says that in 2006 "of the eight plaice stocks recognised by ICES, only one is considered to be harvested sustainably while three are overexploited. Data is insufficient to assess the remaining stocks; however, landings for all stocks are at or near historical lows."

Notes

^ "Plaice". Webster's New World College Dictionary. Wiley Publishing. 2009.

^ FAO: Species Fact Sheets: Pleuronectes platessa, Retrieved 23 November 2009.

^ Froese, Rainer and Pauly, Daniel, eds. (2009). "Pleuronectes platessa" in FishBase. November 2009 version.

^ 
European plaice and sole World Wide Fund for Nature. Retrieved 22 November 2009.

^ a b Plaice Marine Stewardship Council. Retrieved 22 November 2009.

^ C.Michael Hogan. 2011. Celtic Sea. eds. P.Saundry & C.Cleveland. Encyclopedia of Earth. National Council for Science and the Environment. Washington DC.

^ FAO Nominal Catches of Pleuronectes platessa FishBase, Retrieved 23 November 2009

^ FAO: Species Fact Sheets: Hippoglossoides platessoides, Retrieved 23 November 2009.

^ "Plaice." Grolier Encyclopedia of Knowledge, volume 15, copyright 1991. Grolier Inc., ISBN 0-7172-5300-7

^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2007-03-11. Retrieved 2007-01-18.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) Dery, L.M. "American plaice, Hippoglossoides platessoides." Fishery Biology Program, Woods Hole Massachusetts Laboratory of the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), Northeast Fisheries Science Center (NEFSC).retrieved January 18, 2007

^ Froese, Rainer and Pauly, Daniel, eds. (2009). "Hippoglossoides platessoides" in FishBase. November 2009 version.

^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2007-06-07. Retrieved 2007-01-19.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) Fishery Recent Assessment (2005 and 2006). Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization. retrieved January 18, 2007

^ a b Bergeron et al. 1997. Canadian Journal of Zoology 75: 1364-1371.

^ "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2007-02-04. Retrieved 2007-01-19.CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) "American plaice." Underwater World. Fisheries and Oceans Canada. retrieved January 18, 2007

^ FAO Nominal Catches of Hippoglossoides platessoides FishBase, Retrieved 23 November 2009

^ Froese, Rainer and Pauly, Daniel, eds. (2009). "Pleuronectes quadrituberculatus" in FishBase. November 2009 version.

^ Froese, Rainer and Pauly, Daniel, eds. (2009). "Acanthopsetta nadeshnyi" in FishBase. November 2009 version.

^ Seafish. On Plate. Fish & chips Archived 2008-10-11 at the Wayback Machine

^ Clover, Charles. 2004. The End of the Line: How overfishing is changing the world and what we eat. Ebury Press, London. ISBN 0-09-189780-7

^ "European plaice and sole"

References

Rijnsdorp, A.D. (1991) Changes in fecundity of female North Sea plaice (Pleuronectes platessa) between three periods since 1900. ICES Journal of Marine Science; 48: 253-280

Wimpenny, R.S. (1953) The plaice being the buckland lectures. Publisher Edward Arnold

Gibson, R.N. (2004) Flatfishes: Biology and Exploitation. Blackwell Publishing

Clover, Charles. 2004. The End of the Line: How overfishing is changing the world and what we eat. Ebury Press, London. ISBN 0-09-189780-7

1998 Marine Fisheries Review article

Bulletin announcing reaching the total allowable catch of Alaska plaice for 2005 (National Marine Fisheries Service)

External links

Guide to Responsible Sourcing of Plaice - produced by Seafish https://web.archive.org/web/20071008001434/http://www.seafish.org/upload/file/fisheries_management/Plaice%20Factsheet2%20%20final.pdf
Meet the Ekofish otter trawl plaice fishers Information about plaice Marine Stewardship Council.

v

t

e

Flatfish

Generally

larger

flatfish

Halibut

True (2 species) 
Atlantic halibut

Pacific halibut

Other 
Arrowtooth halibut

Shotted halibut

Greenland halibut

Spotted halibut

California halibut

Bastard halibut

Plaice

(4 species) 
European plaice

American plaice

Alaska plaice

Scale-eye plaice

More...

Turbot

True (1 species) 
Scophthalmus maximus

More...

Spiny (3 species) 
Psettodidae

Other 
Diamond turbot

Hornyhead turbot

New Zealand turbot

Ocellated turbot

Spotted turbot

Generally

smaller

flatfish

Sole

True

(135 species) 
Common (Dover) sole

Finless sole

Soleichthys heterorhinos

Yellow sole

More...

American

(28 species) 
Achiridae

More...

Tongue

(138 species) 
Bengal tongue sole

Canary tonguesole

Carrot tonguesole

Cynoglossus suyeni

Durban tonguesole

Fourline tonguesole

Fourlined tonguesole

Ghanaian tonguesole

Hooked tonguesole

Largescale tonguesole

Natal tongue-fish

Nigerian tonguesole

Ripplefin tonguesole

River tonguesole

Roundhead tonguesole

Sand tonguefish

Sharpnose tonguesole

Southern tongue sole

Speckled tonguesole

Symphurus thermophilus

Three-lined tongue sole

More...

Other 
Butter sole

Curlfin sole

Deepsea sole

Dusky sole

English sole

Flathead sole

Lemon sole

New Zealand sole

Northern rock sole

Pacific sand sole

Petrale sole

Rex sole

Rock sole

Roughscale sole

Slender sole

Southern lemon sole

Speckled sole

Yellowfin sole

Other

flounder

Lefteye

(158 species) 
Crested flounder

Flowery flounder

Leopard flounder

Plate fish

Mediterranean scaldfish

Twospot flounder

Witch

More...

Righteye

(101 species) 
American smooth flounder

Arctic flounder

Arrowtooth flounder

Banded-fin flounder

Barfin flounder

Black flounder

Blackfin flounder

Bering flounder

Cleisthenes herzensteini

Cleisthenes pinetorum

Comb flounder

Cresthead flounder

Derwent flounder

European flounder

Far Eastern smooth flounder

Flathead flounder

Greenback flounder

Hypsopsetta macrocephala

Indonesian ocellated flounder

Kamchatka flounder

Large-scale righteye flounder

Marbled flounder

Marleyella maldivensis

Microstomus shuntovi

Narrow-body righteye flounder

New Zealand flounder

Peltorhamphus tenuis

Peppered flounder

Pseudopleuronectes obscurus

Remo flounder

Ridged-eye flounder

Sakhalin sole

Slime flounder

Small-mouth righteye flounder

Speckled flounder

Starry flounder

Stone flounder

Willowy flounder

Winter flounder

Witch (righteye)

Yellow striped flounder

Yellowbelly flounder

Yellowtail flounder

More...

Large tooth

(115 species) 
Anglefin whiff

Bigmouth sanddab

California halibut

Cephalopsetta ventrocellatus

Fine flounder

Five-eyed flounder

Five-rayed sanddab

Fourspot flounder

Gray flounder

Gulf sanddab

Horned whiff

Longfin sanddab

Mimic sanddab

Olive flounder

Pacific sanddab

Peacock flounder

Sand whiff

Shrimp flounder

Small sanddab

Speckled sanddab

Spotfin flounder

Three-eye flounder

Thysanopsetta naresi

Veracruz whiff

More...

Southern

(6 species) 
Antarctic armless flounder

Armless flounder

Finless flounder

Paralichthys lethostigma

Southern flounder

More...

Other 
Citharidae

Samaridae

Misc

Common dab

Chinese brill

Deepwater dab

Longhead dab

New Zealand brill

Scale-eye plaice

Fluke

Related 
Demersal fish

Transitional fossils
Amphistium

Heteronectes

As food
Sole meunière

Turbot War

Predator
billfish

bonito

mackerel

salmon

shark

tuna

Forage
anchovy

herring

menhaden

sardine

shad

sprat

Demersal
cod

flatfish

pollock

ray

v

t

e

Principal commercial fishery species groups

Wild

Large pelagic fish 
Mackerel

Salmon

Saury

Shark

Swordfish

Tuna
albacore

bigeye

Atlantic bluefin

Pacific bluefin

southern bluefin

skipjack

yellowfin

Forage fish 
Anchovy

Capelin

Herring

Ilish

Menhaden

Sardines

Shad

Sprat
european

Demersal fish 
Catfish

Cod
Atlantic

Pacific

Alaska pollock

Flatfish
flounder

halibut

plaice

sole

turbot

Haddock

Mullet

Orange roughy

Pollock

Rockfish

Smelt-whitings

Toothfish

Freshwater fish 
Carp

Sturgeon

Tilapia

Trout

Other wild fish 
Eel

Whitebait

more...

Crustaceans 
Crab

Krill

Lobster

Shrimp

more...

Molluscs 
Abalone

Mussels

Octopus

Oysters

Scallops

Squid

more...

Echinoderms 
Sea cucumbers

Sea urchin

more...

Farmed 
Carp
bighead

common

crucian

grass

silver

Catfish

Freshwater prawns

Gilt-head bream

Mussels

Oysters

Salmon
Atlantic

salmon trout

coho

chinook

Scallops

Seaweed

Shrimp

Tilapia

Commercial fishing

World fish production

Commercial species

Fishing topics

Fisheries glossary
