Craftsman No. 5 jack plane

A hand plane is a tool for shaping wood using muscle power to force the cutting blade over the wood surface. Some rotary power planers are motorized power tools used for the same types of larger tasks, but are unsuitable for fine scale planing where a miniature hand plane is used.

Generally all planes are used to flatten, reduce the thickness of, and impart a smooth surface to a rough piece of lumber or timber. Planing is also used to produce horizontal, vertical, or inclined flat surfaces on workpieces usually too large for shaping, where the integrity of the whole requires the same smooth surface. Special types of planes are designed to cut joints or decorative mouldings.

Hand planes are generally the combination of a cutting edge, such as a sharpened metal plate, attached to a firm body, that when moved over a wood surface, take up relatively uniform shavings, by nature of the body riding on the 'high spots' in the wood, and also by providing a relatively constant angle to the cutting edge, render the planed surface very smooth. A cutter which extends below the bottom surface, or sole, of the plane slices off shavings of wood. A large, flat sole on a plane guides the cutter to remove only the highest parts of an imperfect surface, until, after several passes, the surface is flat and smooth. When used for flattening, bench planes with longer soles are preferred for boards with longer longitudinal dimensions. A longer sole registers against a greater portion of the board's face or edge surface which leads to a more consistently flat surface or straighter edge. Conversely, using a smaller plane allows for more localized low or high spots to remain.

Though most planes are pushed across a piece of wood, holding it with one or both hands, Japanese planes are pulled toward the body, not pushed away.

Woodworking machinery that perform a similar function as hand planes include the jointer and the thickness planer, also called a thicknesser; the job these specialty power tools can still be done by hand planers and skilled manual labor as it was for many centuries. When rough lumber is reduced to dimensional lumber, a large electric motor or internal combustion engine will drive a thickness planer that removes a certain percentage of excess wood to create a uniform, smooth surface on all four sides of the board and in specialty woods, may also plane the cut edges.

Contents

1 History

2 Parts

3 Types

3.1 Order of use

3.2 Material

3.3 Special purposes

4 Use

5 See also

5.1 Plane-makers

6 References

7 Bibliography

8 External links

History

A pair of wooden planes found on board the 16th century carrack Mary Rose

Hand planes are ancient, originating thousands of years ago. Early planes were made from wood with a rectangular slot or mortise cut across the center of the body. The cutting blade or iron was held in place with a wooden wedge. The wedge was tapped into the mortise and adjusted with a small mallet, a piece of scrap wood or with the heel of the user's hand. Planes of this type have been found in excavations of old sites as well as drawings of woodworking from medieval Europe and Asia. The earliest known examples of the woodworking plane have been found in Pompeii although other Roman examples have been unearthed in Britain and Germany. The Roman planes resemble modern planes in essential function, most having iron wrapping a wooden core top, bottom, front and rear and an iron blade secured with a wedge. One example found in Cologne has a body made entirely of bronze without a wooden core. A Roman plane iron used for cutting moldings was found in Newstead, England. Histories prior to these examples are not clear although furniture pieces and other woodwork found in Egyptian tombs show surfaces carefully smoothed with some manner of cutting edge or scraping tool. There are suggestions that the earliest planes were simply wooden blocks fastened to the soles of adzes to effect greater control of the cutting action.

In the mid-1860s, Leonard Bailey began producing a line of cast iron-bodied hand planes, the patents for which were later purchased by Stanley Rule & Level, now Stanley Works. The original Bailey designs were further evolved and added to by Justus Traut and others at Stanley Rule & Level. The Bailey and Bedrock designs became the basis for most modern metal hand plane designs manufactured today. The Bailey design is still manufactured by Stanley Works.

In 1918 an air-powered handheld planing tool was developed to reduce shipbuilding labor during World War I. The air-driven cutter spun at 8000 to 15000 rpm and allowed one man to do the planing work of up to fifteen men who used manual tools.

Modern hand planes are made from wood, ductile iron or bronze which produces a tool that is heavier and will not rust.

Parts

Bench plane (top), block plane (below)

A chipbreaker secured atop a bench plane iron

The standard components of a hand plane include:

A: The mouth is an opening in the sole of the plane through which the blade extends, and through which wood shavings rise.

B: The iron is a steel blade which cuts the wood.

C: The lever cap secures the cap iron and iron firmly to the frog.

D: The depth adjustment knob controls the cutting depth of the iron.

E: The knob allows a second hand to guide the plane.

F: The cap iron or chipbreaker reinforces the iron and curls and breaks apart wood shavings as they pass through the mouth.

G: The lateral adjustment lever skews the iron so that the depth of cut is uniform across the mouth.

H: The tote is the principal handle for gripping the plane.

I: Is cam lever which pivots a sliding section of the forward end of the sole to adjust the gap in the plane's mouth. It is anchored to the threaded post of the knob and secured by tightening the knob.

J: The frog is an adjustable iron wedge that holds the plane iron at the proper angle and allows it to be varied in depth relative to the sole. The frog is screwed down to the inside of the sole through two parallel slots and on many planes is only adjustable with a screwdriver when the plane iron is removed. Some planes, such as the Stanley Bedrock line and bench planes made by Lie-Nielsen and WoodRiver/Woodcraft have a screw mechanism that allows the frog to be adjusted without removing the blade.

The sole is the bottom face of the plane.

Types

Router plane

Most planes fall within the categories (by size) of block plane, smoothing plane, and jointing plane. Specialty planes include the shoulder plane, router plane, bullnose plane, and chisel plane, among others. 

Electrically powered hand planers (loosely referred to as power planes) have joined the hand-held plane family.

"Bench planes" are characterized by having their cutting bevel facing down and attached to a chipbreaker. Most metal bench planes, and some larger wooden ones, are designed with a rear handle known as a tote. "Block planes" are characterized by the absence of a chipbreaker and the cutting iron bedded with the bevel up. The block plane is a smaller tool that can be held with one hand which excels at working against the grain on a cut end of a board. It is also good for general purpose work such as taking down a knot in the wood, smoothing small pieces, and chamfering edges.

Different types of bench planes are designed to perform different tasks, with the name and size of the plane being defined by the use. Bailey iron bench planes were designated by number respective to the length of the plane. This has carried over through the type, regardless of manufacturer. A No. 1 plane is but little more than five inches long. A typical smoothing plane (approx. nine inches) is usually a No. 4, jack planes at about fourteen inches are No. 5, an eighteen-inch foreplane will be a No. 6, and the jointer planes at twenty-two to twenty-four inches in length are No. 7 or 8 respectively. A designation, such as No. 4½ indicates a plane of No. 4 length but slightly wider. A designation, such as 5-1/2 indicates the length of a No. 5 but slightly wider (actually, the width of a No. 6 or a No. 7), while a designation, such as 5-1/4 indicates the length of a No. 5 but slightly narrower (actually, the width of a No. 3). "Bedrock" versions of the above are simply 600 added to the base number (although no "601" was ever produced, such plane is indeed available from specialist dealers; 602 through 608, including all the fractionals, were made).

Order of use

Stanley No. 32 transitional jointer plane (26 inches long)

A smoothing plane

 A Japanese plane in use

A typical order of use in flattening, truing, and smoothing a rough sawn board might be:

A scrub plane, which removes large amounts of wood quickly, is typically around 9 inches (230 mm) long, but narrower than a smoothing plane, has an iron with a convex cutting edge, and has a wider mouth opening to accommodate the ejection of thicker shavings/chips.

A jack plane is up to 14 inches (360 mm) long, continues the job of roughing out, but with more accuracy and flattening capability than the scrub.

A jointer plane (including the smaller 14 to 20 inches (360 to 510 mm) fore plane) is between 22 to 30 inches (560 to 760 mm) long, and is used for jointing and final flattening out of boards.

A smoothing plane, up to 10 inches (250 mm) long, is used to begin preparing the surface for finishing.

A polishing plane (kanna) is a traditional Japanese plane designed to take a smaller shaving than a Western smoothing plane to create an extremely smooth surface. Polishing planes are the same length as western smoothing planes, and unlike Western planes, which are pushed across a board, is pulled with both hands towards the user.

Material

Planes may also be classified by the material of which they are constructed:

A wooden plane is entirely wood except for the blade. The iron is held into the plane with a wooden wedge, and is adjusted by striking the plane with a hammer.

A transitional plane has a wooden body with a metal casting set in it to hold and adjust the blade.

A metal plane is largely constructed of metal, except, perhaps, for the handles.

An infill plane has a body of metal filled with very dense and hard wood on which the blade rests and the handles are formed. They are typically of English or Scottish manufacture. They are prized for their ability to smooth difficult grained woods when set very finely.

A side-escapement plane has a tall, narrow, wooden body with an iron held in place by a wedge. They are characterized by the method of shaving ejection. Instead of being expelled from the center of the plane and exiting from the top, these planes have a slit in the side by which the shaving is ejected. On some variations, the slit is accompanied by a circular bevel cut in the side of the plane.

Special purposes

Some special types of planes include:

Stanley No. 92 rabbet plane

The rabbet plane, also known as a rebate or openside plane, which cuts rabbets (rebates) i.e. shoulders, or steps.

The shoulder plane, is characterized by a cutter that is flush with the edges of the plane, allowing trimming right up to the edge of a workpiece. It is commonly used to clean up dadoes (housings) and tenons for joinery.

Stanley No. 78 fillister plane

The fillister plane, similar to a rabbet plane, with a fence that registers on the board's edge to cut rabbets with an accurate width.

The moulding plane, which is used to cut mouldings along the edge of a board.

The grooving plane which is used to cut grooves along the edge of a board for joining. Grooves are the same as dadoes/housings, but are being distinguished by running with the grain.

The plow/plough plane, which cuts grooves and dadoes (housings) not in direct contact with the edge of the board.

The router plane, which cleans up the bottom of recesses such as shallow mortises, grooves, and dadoes (housings). Router planes come in several sizes and can also be pressed into service to thickness the cheeks of tenons so that they are parallel to the face of the board.

The chisel plane, similar to a bullnose plane, but with an exposed blade which allows it to remove wood up to a perpendicular surface such as from the bottom inside of a box.

Finger planes. Note the size.

The finger plane, which is used for smoothing very small pieces such as toy parts, very thin strips of wood, etc. The very small curved bottom varieties are known as violin makers planes and are used in making stringed instruments.

The bullnose plane has a very short leading edge, or "toe", to its body, and so can be used in tight spaces; most commonly of the shoulder and rabbet variety. Some bullnose planes have a removable toe so that they can pull double duty as a chisel plane.

Stanley No. 55 combination plane

The combination plane, which combines the function of moulding and rabbet planes, which has different cutters and adjustments.

The circular or compass plane, which utilizes an adjustment system to control the flex on a steel sheet sole and create a uniform curve. A concave setting permits great control for planing large curves, like table sides or chair arms, and the convex works well for chair arms, legs and backs, and other applications.

The toothed plane, which is used for smoothing wood with irregular grain. and for preparing stock for traditional hammer veneering applications.

The spill plane which creates long, spiraling wood shavings or tapers

The spar plane, which is used for smoothing round shapes, like boat masts and chair legs.

The match plane, which is used for making tongue and groove boards.

Hollows and Rounds are similar to moulding planes, but lack a specific moulding profile. Instead, they cut either a simple concave or convex shape on the face or edge of a board to create a single element of a complex-profile moulding. They are used in pairs or sets of various sizes to create moulding profile elements such as fillets, coves, bullnoses, thumbnails ovolos, ogees, etc. When making mouldings, hollows and rounds must be used together to create the several shapes of the profile. However, they may be used as a single plane to create a simple decorative cove or round-over on the edge of a board. Many of these hollows and rounds can be classified in the category of side-escapement planes.

Use

Planing with the grain

Planing against the grain

Planing wood along its side grain should result in thin shavings rising above the surface of the wood as the edge of the plane iron is pushed forward, leaving a smooth surface, but sometimes splintering occurs. This is largely a matter of cutting with the grain or against the grain respectively, referring to the side grain of the piece of wood being worked.

The grain direction can be determined by looking at the edge or side of the work piece. Wood fibers can be seen running out to the surface that is being planed. When the fibers meet the work surface it looks like the point of an arrow that indicates the direction. With some very figured and difficult woods, the grain runs in many directions and therefore working against the grain is inevitable. In this case, a very sharp and finely-set blade is required.

When planing against the grain, the wood fibers are lifted by the plane iron, resulting in a jagged finish, called tearout.

Planing across the grain is sometimes called "traverse" or "transverse" planing.

Planing the end grain of the board involves different techniques, and frequently different planes designed for working end grain. Block planes and other bevel-up planes are often effective in planing the difficult nature of end grain. These planes are usually designed to use an iron bedded at a "low angle," typically about 12 degrees.

See also

Card scraper

Cheese slicer, a culinary plane-like tool

Planer (disambiguation) for other types of planing tools and machines

Shooting board

Spokeshave

Plane-makers

Alexander Mathieson & Sons, a Scottish plane manufacturer

Holtzapffel, a London plane manufacturer

Lie-Nielsen Toolworks, a U.S. maker of artisan tools

Millers Falls Company, plane-maker

T. Norris & Son, a London plane-maker

Edward Preston & Sons, a plane manufacturer

Stanley Works, a major US plane manufacturer

Stewart Spiers, a Scottish plane-maker

Veritas Tools, a Canadian plane manufacturer

Clifton planes, an English plane manufacturer

References

^ C. W. Hampton, E. Clifford: "Planecraft", page 9. C. and J. Hampton Ltd. 1959

^ Henry C. Mercer: "Ancient Carpenters' Tools", page 16. Bucks County Historical Society. 1975

^ Planing Ship Timbers with Little Machines, Popular Science monthly, December 1918, page 68, Scanned by Google Books: https://books.google.com/books?id=EikDAAAAMBAJ&pg=PA68

^ a b https://www.popularwoodworking.com/tools/understanding_bench_planes

^ "Toothed Plane". ECE. Archived from the original on 2014-07-07. Retrieved 2014-12-11.

^ "Shaping plane for rounding a spar".

^ "Stanley No. 148 Match Plane".

Bibliography

Greber, Josef M. (1956 reprinted 1987) Die Geschichte des Hobels. Von der Steinheit bis zur Enstehung der Holzwerkzeugfabriken im frühen 19. Jahrhundert, Zurich, reprinted Hanover: Verlag Th. Schäfer OCLC 246467323

Greber, Josef M., transl. by Seth W. Burchard (1991) The History of the Woodworking Plane from the Stone Age to the Development of Woodworking Factories in the Early 19th Century, Albany, NY: Early American Industries Association OCLC 602189643

Hack, Garrett (1997) The Handplane Book. ISBN 1-56158-155-0

Hoadley, R. Bruce (2000) Understanding Wood: A Craftsman’s Guide to Wood Technology. ISBN 1-56158-358-8

Russell, David R., with Robert Lesage and photographs by James Austin, cataloguing assisted by Peter Hackett (2010) Antique Woodworking Tools: Their Craftsmanship from the Earliest Times to the Twentieth Century Cambridge: John Adamson ISBN 978-1-898565-05-5 OCLC 727125586

Salaman, R. A. (1989) Dictionary of Woodworking Tools. ISBN 0-04-440256-2

Todd, R., Allen, D., Alting, L., Manufacturing Processes Reference Guide, p. 124, 1994

Watson, Aldren A. (1982) Hand Tools: Their Ways and Workings. ISBN 1-55821-224-8

Whelan, John M. (1993) The Wooden Plane: Its History, Form and Function Mendham, NJ: Astragal Press ISBN 978-1-879335-32-5

External links

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Plane (tool).

Handplane Central Information for all types of hand planes, including wooden planes, infill planes and Stanley type planes. Also information on how to make hand planes.

Catalog of American Patented Antique Tools A pictorial collection of antique planes and other tools showing some of the variety in styles.

The history, types, collector value and other information on the British hand plane maker Record Planes

Old woodworking planes

v

t

e

Planes

Bedrock plane

Block plane

Chamfer plane

Compass plane

Finger plane

Grooving plane

Jack plane

Japanese plane

Jointer plane

Moulding plane

Razee plane

Rebate plane

Router plane

Scrub plane

Shoulder plane

Smoothing plane

Spokeshave

Surform

v

t

e

Cutting and abrasive tools

Abrasive saw

Axe

Blade

Bandsaw

Bolt cutter

Broach

Ceramic tile cutter

Chainsaw

Circular saw

Chisel

Coping saw

Countersink

Cutting tool

Diagonal pliers

Diamond blade

Diamond tool

Drawknife

Drill bit

Emery cloth

File

Fretsaw

Froe

Glass cutter

Grater

Grinding wheel

Hacksaw

Hand saw

Hole saw

Incisor

Knife

Laser

Lawn mower

Machete

Meat slicer

Mezzaluna

Milling cutter

Miter saw

Nail clipper

Nibbler

Pencil sharpener

Pipecutter

Pizza cutter

Plasma cutter

Plane

Pocket knife

Rasp

Razor

Reamer

Sandpaper

Saw

Scalpel

Scissors

Snips

Steel wool

Surform

Switchblade

Tool bit

Utility knife

Water jet cutter

Wire brush

Wire stripper

Types of tools

Cleaning

Cutting and abrasive

Forestry

Garden

Hand

Machine and metalworking

Measuring and alignment

Power

v

t

e

Woodworking

Overviews 
History

Glossary

Wood (lumber)

Occupations 
Boat building

Bow and arrow

Bush carpentry

Cabinetry

Caning

Carpentry

Certosina

Chainsaw carving

Chip carving

Clogs

Ébéniste

Fretwork

Intarsia

Japanese carpentry

Khatam

Kohlrosing

Log building

Marquetry

Millwork

Parquetry

Pyrography

Relief carving

Root carving

Sawdust

Segmented turning

Shingle weaving

Shipbuilding

Spindle turning

Timber framing

Treen

Whittling

Wood carving

Woodturning

Wood flour

Woods

Soft 
Cedar (Calocedrus, Cedrus)

Cypress

Douglas-fir

Fir

Juniper

Larch

Kauri

Pine

Rimu

Spruce

Yew

Hard 
Afromosia

Alder

Andiroba

Anigre

Ash

Apple

Aspen

Avodire

Balsa

Beech

Bilinga

Birch

African Blackwood

Australian Blackwood

Boxwood

Bubinga

Camphor

Cedrela

Cherry

Chestnut

Cocobolo

Cumaru

Ebony

Elm

Eucalyptus

Hazel

Hickory

Hornbeam

Idigbo

Imbuia

Ipê

Iroko

Jarra

Jelutong

Lignum vitae

Linden (lime, basswood)

Lovoa

Merbau

Mahogany (American, African)

Maple

Meranti

Oak

Padauk

Pear

Plum

Poplar

Purpleheart

Ovankol

Ramin

Red Quebracho

Rosewood

Rubberwood

Sapele

Teak

Totara

Utile

Walnut

Wenge

Willow

Zebrano

Engineered 
Cross-laminated

Glue laminated

Hardboard

MDF

OSB

Particle board

Plywood

Wood-plastic composite

Tools

Abrasives

Axe

Adze

Chisel

Drawknife

Drill

Float

Gimlet

Gauge

Impact driver

Janka hardness test

Jointer

Mallet

Milling machine

Mitre box

Rasp

Router

Shaper

Sandpaper

Square (Carpenters, Combination, Speed, Try)

Thickness planer

Timber-framing

Vise

Winding sticks

Wood scribe

Workbench

Clamps 
Band clamp

C-clamp

F-clamp

Flooring clamp

Gripe

Mitre clamp

Pipe clamp

Saws 
Backsaw

Bandsaw

Bow

Bucksaw

Chainsaw

Circular

Compass

Coping

Crosscut

Frame

Fretsaw

Hand saw

Jigsaw

Keyhole

Miter

Rip

Scroll

Table

Veneer

Whipsaw

Planes 
Bedrock plane

Block plane

Chamfer plane

Compass plane

Finger plane

Grooving plane

Jack plane

Japanese plane

Jointer plane

Moulding plane

Razee plane

Rebate plane

Router plane

Scrub plane

Shoulder plane

Smoothing plane

Spokeshave

Surform

Geometry

Joints 
Birdsmouth

Biscuit

Box

Bridle

Butt

Butterfly

Coping

Crown of thorns

Dado

Dovetail

Finger

Groove

Halved

Hammer-headed tenon

Knee

Lap

Mason's mitre

Miter

Mortise and tenon

Rabbet/Rebate

Scarf

Splice

Tongue and groove

Profiles 
Bead

Bevel

Chamfer

Ogee

Ogive

Ovolo

Treatments 
Adhesive

French polish

Heat bending

Lacquer

Oil

Paint

Paint stripper

Steam bending

Thermal

Varnish

Wax

Wood drying

Wood preservation

Wood stain

Wood finishing

Organizations 
American Association of Woodturners

Architectural Woodwork Institute

British Woodworking Federation

Building and Wood Workers' International

Caricature Carvers of America

International Federation of Building and Wood Workers

National Wood Carvers Association

Society of Wood Engravers

Timber Framers Guild

Conversion 
Chainsaw mill

Hewing

Sawmill

Whipsaw

Wood splitting

Flat sawing

Quarter sawing

Rift sawing

Techniques 
Frame and panel

Frameless construction

 Category

 WikiProject

 Commons

Authority control 
GND: 4194094-5

NDL: 01184110
