"National political overview

This article is about the politics of the People's Republic of China. For other uses, see Politics of China (disambiguation).

The neutrality of this article is disputed. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met. (March 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Politics of the People's Republic of China

中华人民共和国的政治

Zhōnghuá rénmín gònghéguó de zhèngzhì National Emblem of the People's Republic of China

Polity type Unitary one-party socialist republic

Constitution 1982 Constitution of the People's Republic of China

Legislative branch

Name National People's Congress

Type Unicameral

Meeting place Great Hall of the People, Beijing

Presiding officer Li Zhanshu, Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress

Executive branch

Head of State

Title General Secretary and President

Currently Xi Jinping

Appointer National People's Congress

Head of Government

Title Premier

Currently Li Keqiang

Appointer President, according to the decision of the National People's Congress

Cabinet

Name Li Keqiang Government

Current cabinet 13th State Council

Leader Li Keqiang

Deputy leader Han Zheng

Headquarters Zhongnanhai

Ministries 26

Judicial branch

Name Judicial system of China

Supreme People's Court

Chief judge Zhou Qiang (President)

Seat Beijing

Supreme People's Procuratorate

Chief judge Zhang Jun

China

This article is part of a series on the

politics and government of

China

Leadership

Leadership generations

Succession of power

Hu–Wen Administration (2002–2012)

Xi–Li Administration (2012–2017)

Xi Core Administration (since 2017)
4th Leadership Core: Xi Jinping

19th Party Politburo: Xi Jinping

13th State Council: Li Keqiang

Current state leaders

Current provincial leaders

National leaders

Orders of precedence

Paramount leader: Xi Jinping

Communist Party leader: Xi Jinping

Head of state: Xi Jinping

Head of government: Li Keqiang

Congress Chairman: Li Zhanshu

Conference Chairman: Wang Yang

Commander-in-chief: Xi Jinping

Politburo Standing Committee members

Related systems

Democratic centralism

Collective leadership

Organization Department

Elections

Civil service

Communist Party

History

Principal leaders

Constitution

Admission Oath (Article 6)

Organization

National Party Congress (19th)
Central Committee (19th)
General Secretary (list)
Xi Jinping

Central Politburo (19th)
Standing Committee (list)

Central Secretariat
Top-ranked secretary: Wang Huning

Central Military Commission
Chairman: Xi Jinping

Vice-Chairmen:

Xu Qiliang, Zhang Youxia

National Security Commission
Chairman: Xi Jinping

Vice-Chairmen:

Li Keqiang, Li Zhanshu

Office Chief: Ding Xuexiang

Comprehensively Deepening Reforms Commission
Director: Xi Jinping

Deputy Directors:

Li Keqiang, Wang Huning, Han Zheng

Secretary-General: Wang Huning

Financial & Economic Affairs Commission
Director: Xi Jinping

Deputy Director: Li Keqiang

Office Chief: Liu He

General Office
Director: Ding Xuexiang

General Secretary's Office 
Chief: Ding Xuexiang

Central Security Bureau
Central Guard Unit

Office of the Central Secrecy Commission

Organization Department
Head: Chen Xi

Central Commission for Discipline Inspection (19th)
Secretary: Zhao Leji

* * *

Provincial committee
Standing committee
Secretary

Deputy secretaries

United Front

Political Consultative Conference
National Committee
Chairman: Wang Yang

Vice-Chairpersons
Top-ranked: Zhang Qingli

Secretary-General: Xia Baolong

Political parties:
CPC (ruling)
United Front Work Department
Head: You Quan

RCCK

CDL

CDNCA

CAPD

CPWDP

CZGP

JS

TDSGL

Federation of Industry and Commerce

People's organizations

Ideology

Marxism–Leninism

Mao Zedong Thought

Socialism with Chinese characteristics

Deng Xiaoping Theory
Primary stage of socialism

Four Cardinal Principles

Three Represents

Scientific Outlook on Development

Harmonious Socialist Society

Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era
Chinese Dream

Four Comprehensives

Constitution

Law

Constitution
Previous constitutions
1954

1975

1978

"People's democratic dictatorship" (Article 1)

Democratic centralism (Article 3)

Constitutional oath of office (Article 27)

Protection of human rights (Article 33)

Freedom of religion (Article 36)

* * *

Chinese legal system
Civil law tradition

Socialist law tradition

Laws
Legislation Law

List of statutes

* * *

General Principles of the Civil Law (to 2020)

Civil Code (From 2021)

Marriage Law

Labour law
Labour Law

Labour Contract Law

Property law
Property Law

Intellectual property law
Patent law

* * *

Administrative law
Administrative Procedure Law

* * *

Criminal law
Capital punishment
Capital offences

Death sentence with reprieve

Legislative

National People's Congress (13th)
Members

Plenary sessions
Voting results

Presidium

Standing Committee
Chairman: Li Zhanshu

Vice-Chairpersons
Top-ranked: Wang Chen

Secretary-General: Yang Zhenwu 

Members

Special committees
Ethnic Affairs

Constitution and Law

Supervisory and Judicial Affairs

Financial and Economic Affairs

Education, Science, Culture and Public Health

Foreign Affairs

Overseas Chinese Affairs

Environment Protection and Resources Conservation

Agriculture and Rural Affairs

Social Development Affairs

Legislation Law

Elections

Presidency

President (list): Xi Jinping

Presidential spouse: Peng Liyuan

Presidential Office 
Chief: Ding Xuexiang

Vice-President: Wang Qishan

Executive

State Council (Central People's Government)
Li Keqiang Cabinet II
Premier (list): Li Keqiang

Vice-Premiers (list)
Han Zheng

Sun Chunlan

Hu Chunhua

Liu He

State Councilors
Wei Fenghe

Wang Yong

Wang Yi

Xiao Jie

Zhao Kezhi

Secretary-General: Xiao Jie

Cabinet-level departments
National Development & Reform Commission

Central bank

National Audit Office

General Office
Secretary-General

Deputy Secretary-Generals

State-owned Assets Supervision & Administration Commission
Main Central Enterprises

Military

Central Military Commission (CMC)
Chairman (supreme commander):
Xi Jinping

Vice-Chairmen:
Xu Qiliang

Zhang Youxia

Members:
Wei Fenghe

Li Zuocheng

Miao Hua

Zhang Shengmin

Departments:
General Office

Joint Staff Dept.
Chief: Li Zuocheng

Political Work Dept.
Director: Miao Hua

Logistic Support Dept.

Equipment Development Dept.

Training & Administration Dept.

National Defense Mobilization Dept.

Discipline Inspection Commission
Secretary: Zhang Shengmin

Politics & Legal Affairs Commission

Science & Technology Commission

Strategic Planning Office

Reform & Organizational Structure Office

Int'l Military Cooperation Office

Audit Office

Offices Administration Agency

National armed forces:
 People's Liberation Army
Theater commands

 People's Armed Police
 China Coast Guard

 Militia

State Council
National Defense Mobilization Commission

Chairman: Li Keqiang

Ministry of National Defense
Minister: Wei Fenghe

Ministry of Veterans Affairs

State Administration for Sci., Tech. & Industry for National Defense

* * *

Military history

Armed conflicts

Military modernization

Military reform since 2015
CMC Leading Group for Military Reform
Leader: Xi Jinping

Supervision

Corruption in China
Anti-corruption campaign since 2012

* * *

CPC Central Commission for Discipline Inspection (19th)
Secretary: Zhao Leji

Deputy Secretaries
Yang Xiaodu

Zhang Shengmin

Liu Jinguo

Yang Xiaochao

Li Shulei

Xu Lingyi

Xiao Pei

Chen Xiaojiang

Secretary-General: Yang Xiaochao

National Supervisory Commission
Director: Yang Xiaodu

Central Leading Group for Inspection Work
Leader: Zhao Leji

* * *

Commission for Discipline Inspection of the Central Military Commission
Secretary: Zhang Shengmin

* * *

Independent Commission Against Corruption (Hong Kong)

* * *

Commission Against Corruption (Macau)

Judiciary

Law enforcement

CPC Central Politics and Law Commission

Secretary: Guo Shengkun

Supreme People's Court
President: Zhou Qiang

People's Courts Judicial Police

Supreme People's Procuratorate
Prosecutor General: Zhang Jun

People's Procuratorates Judicial Police

State Council
Ministry of Public Security
Minister: Zhao Kezhi (State Councilor)

Public Security Organs People's Police

State Immigration Administration

Local public security bureaus

Ministry of State Security
Minister: Chen Wenqing

State Security Organs People's Police

Ministry of Justice
Minister: Fu Zhenghua

Judicial Administrative Organs People's Police

Bureau of Prison Administration 

Office for Safeguarding National Security of the CPG in the HKSAR

* * *

Urban Management (chengguan)

* * *

Judiciary of Hong Kong
Court of Final Appeal

Department of Justice
Prosecutions Division

Law enforcement in Hong Kong

Security Bureau
Regular Disciplined Services
Hong Kong Police Force

* * *

Judiciary of Macau
Court of Final Appeal

Public Prosecutions Office

Secretariat for Security
Macau Security Force
Unitary Police Services 
Public Security Police

Judiciary Police 

Publicity

Central Leading Group for Propaganda and Ideology
Leader: Wang Huning

Central Guidance Commission on Building Spiritual Civilization
Director: Wang Huning

Deputy Director: Huang Kunming

Central Publicity (Propaganda) Department
Head: Huang Kunming

National Press and Publication Administration

China Film Administration 

State Council Information Office
China Daily

Ministry of Culture and Tourism

National Radio and Television Administration

China Media Group
China Central Television
China Global Television Network

China National Radio

China Radio International

Xinhua News Agency
Reference News

China News Service

People's Daily
Global Times

China Today

* * *

Censorship in China
Radio jamming

Overseas censorship of Chinese issues

Media of China
Internal media

Publishing industry in China

* * *

Internet in China
Internet censorship
Great Firewall

Great Cannon

Central Cyberspace Affairs Commission
Director: Xi Jinping

Deputy director: Li Keqiang

Cyberspace Administration of China
Director: Xu Lin

Hong Kong

Macau

Central Leading Group on Hong Kong and Macau Affairs
Leader: Han Zheng

HK & Macau Affairs Office
Director: Zhang Xiaoming

Liaison Office in Hong Kong

Liaison Office in Macau

One country, two systems
Special administrative regions

* * *

Hong Kong Basic Law

Chief Executive: Lam Cheng Yuet-ngor
Hong Kong SAR Government

Politics of Hong Kong
Independence movement

Mainland & HK CEPA

* * *

Macao Basic Law

Chief Executive: Chui Sai On
Macau SAR Government

Politics of Macau

Mainland & Macau CEPA

Cross-Strait relations

Cross-Strait relations
Chinese Civil War

One-China policy

Political status of Taiwan
Republic of China on Taiwan
Taiwan Area

"Taiwan Province", PRC

Taiwan independence movement

Anti-Secession Law

Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement

Cross-Strait Service Trade Agreement

Chinese unification

* * *

Central Leading Group for Taiwan Affairs
Leader: Xi Jinping

Deputy Leader: Wang Yang

Taiwan Affairs Office
Director: Zhang Zhijun

Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits

Foreign relations

Central Foreign Affairs Commission
Director: Xi Jinping

Deputy Director: Li Keqiang

Secretary-General: Yang Jiechi

Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Minister: Wang Yi (State Councilor)

Spokespersons

Diplomatic missions

* * *

Diplomatic missions of China / in China

* * *

Foreign aid from China / to China

International Development Cooperation Agency

Ministry of Commerce

Exim Bank of China

China Development Bank

Belt and Road Initiative
Silk Road Fund

Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank

BRICS
New Development Bank

* * *

Ministry of National Defense
International Military Cooperation Office

* * *

NPC Foreign Affairs Committee

CPC International Liaison Department

State Council Information Office

State Administration of Foreign Experts Affairs

Overseas Chinese Affairs Office

* * *

Chinese nationality law

Chinese passports (Hong Kong; Macau)

Visa requirements for Chinese citizens (Hong Kong, Macau)

Visa policy of China (Hong Kong; Macau)

National Immigration Administration

* * *

Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence

Panda diplomacy

Beijing Consensus

Sino-British Joint Declaration

One country, two systems

* * *

China and the United Nations

China and the World Trade Organization

Shanghai Cooperation Organisation

* * *

China–Africa relations

China–Caribbean relations

China–European Union relations

China–Pacific relations

China–Russia relations

China–United States relations

Related topics

Administrative divisions

Hukou system

Family planning

Ethnic minorities

Communism

 China portal 
Other countries

v

t

e

The politics of the People's Republic of China takes place in a framework of a socialist republic run by a single party, the Communist Party of China, headed by the General Secretary. State power within the People's Republic of China (PRC) is exercised through the Communist Party, the Central People's Government (State Council) and their provincial and local representation. The state uses Internal Reference , secret documents produced by Xinhua News Agency, similar to US's President's Daily Brief, though delivered to most of its officials according to the level of secrecy of the information, a major source of information of the society.

The PRC consists of 22 provinces (excluding the claimed Taiwan Province), four municipalities, five autonomous regions and two special administrative regions of Hong Kong and Macau with the latter operating in a separate political systems different from the PRC.

Contents

1 Overview

2 Typology

2.1 Socialist consultative democracy

3 Communist Party

4 Government

5 Local government

6 Administrative divisions

7 National armed forces

8 State leaders

8.1 Politburo Standing Committee

8.2 Full Politburo members

9 Elections

10 Legal system

11 Nationality and ethnicity

12 Foreign relations

13 International disputes

13.1 Territorial disputes

14 International organization participation

15 See also

16 Notes

17 References

18 Bibliography

19 External links

Overview

Each local Bureau or office is under the coequal authority of the local leader and the leader of the corresponding office, bureau or ministry at the next higher level. People's Congress members at the county level are elected by voters. These county-level People's Congresses have the responsibility of oversight of local government and elect members to the Provincial (or Municipal in the case of independent municipalities) People's Congress. The Provincial People's Congress, in turn, elects members to the National People's Congress that meets each year in March in Beijing. The ruling Communist Party committee at each level plays a large role in the selection of appropriate candidates for election to the local congress and to the higher levels.

The President of China is the head of state, serving as the ceremonial figurehead under National People's Congress. The Premier of China is the head of government, presiding over the State Council composed of four vice premiers and the heads of ministries and commissions. As a one-party state, the General Secretary of the Communist Party of China holds ultimate power and authority over state and government. The offices of President, General Secretary, and Chairman of the Central Military Commission have been held simultaneously by one individual since 1993, granting the individual de jure and de facto power over the country.

China's population, geographical vastness, and social diversity frustrate attempts to rule from Beijing. Economic reform during the 1980s and the devolution of much central government decision making, combined with the strong interest of local Communist Party officials in enriching themselves, has made it increasingly difficult for the central government to assert its authority. Political power has become much less personal and more institutionally based than it was during the first forty years of the PRC. For example, Deng Xiaoping was never the General Secretary of the Communist Party of China, President, or Premier of China, but was the leader of China for a decade. Today the authority of China's leaders is much more tied to their institutional base. The incident of Hong Kong’s Missing Booksellers had alarmed the public that political confrontation of different political cadre in the senior level of the Chinese Communist Party still dominates China's politics.

Central government leaders must, in practice, build consensus for new policies among party members, local and regional leaders, influential non-party members, and the population at large. However, control is often maintained over the larger group through control of information.
The Chinese Communist Party considers China to be in the initial stages of socialism. Many Chinese and foreign observers see the PRC as in transition from a system of public ownership to one in which private ownership plays an increasingly important role. Privatization of housing and increasing freedom to make choices about education and employment severely weakened the work unit system that was once the basic cell of Communist Party control over society. China's vast social, cultural and economic diversity has led to heterogeneity in the policies applied at the local and regional level.

The social, cultural, and political as well as economic consequences of market reform have created tensions in Chinese society. Some Chinese scholars such as Zhou Tianyong, as of 5 April 2005 the vice director of research of the Central Party School, argue, as of September 2004, that gradual political reform, as well as repression of those pushing for overly rapid change over the next twenty years, will be essential if China is to avoid an overly turbulent transition to a middle class dominated polity. Some Chinese look back to the Cultural Revolution and fear chaos if the Communist Party should lose control due to domestic upheavals and so a robust system of monitoring and control is in place to counter the growing pressure for political change.

Typology

Socialist consultative democracy

The neutrality of this section is disputed. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met. (April 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

The Communist Party of China calls China's system a "socialist consultative democracy". According to an article in the Communist Party theoretical journal Qiushi, "Consultative democracy was created by the CPC and the Chinese people as a form of socialist democracy. ... Not only representing a commitment to socialism, it carries forward China’s political and cultural traditions. Not only representing a commitment to the organizational principles and leadership mode of democratic centralism, it also affirms the role of the general public in a democracy. Not only representing a commitment to the leadership of the CPC, it also gives play to the role of all political parties and organizations as well as people of all ethnic groups and all sectors of society".

According to a China Today editorial, "Consultative democracy guarantees widespread and effective participation in politics through consultations carried out by political parties, peoples congresses, government departments, CPPCC committees, peoples organizations, communities, and social organizations".

In 2012, Li Changjian, a member of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC), China's top political advisory body, said that consultative democracy should be made a greater priority in China's political reform. A significant feature of socialist consultative democracy is consulting with different sectors in order to achieve maximum consensus.

However, elections are also an element in socialist consultative democracy, even though the People's Republic of China is often erroneously criticised in the West for not having elections. This error likely stems from a misunderstanding of the PRC's election system. However, no substantial legal political opposition groups are allowed to participate in the election.

Communist Party

Main articles: Communist Party of China and Ideology of the Communist Party of China

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Politics of China" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

The 90 million-member Communist Party of China (CPC) continues to dominate government. In periods of relative liberalization, the influence of people and groups outside the formal party structure has tended to increase, particularly in the economic realm. Under the command economy, every state-owned enterprise was required to have a party committee. The introduction of the market economy means that economic institutions now exist in which the party has limited or lots of power.

Nevertheless, in all governmental institutions in the PRC, the party committees at all levels maintain a powerful and pivotal role in the administration. Central party control is tightest in central government offices and in urban economic, industrial, and cultural settings; it is considerably looser over the government and party establishments in rural areas, where the majority of Mainland Chinese people live. The CPC's most important responsibility comes in the selection and promotion of personnel. They also see that party and state policy guidance is followed and that non-party members do not create autonomous organizations that could challenge party rule. Particularly important are the leading small groups which coordinate activities of different agencies. There is no convention that government committees contain at least one non-party member, party membership is a definite aid in the promotion and in being included in crucial policy-setting meetings.

Constitutionally, the party's highest body is the Party Congress, which is supposed to meet at least once every 5 years. Meetings were irregular before the Cultural Revolution but have been periodic since then. The party elects the Central Committee and the primary organs of power are formally parts of the central committee.

The primary organs of power in the Communist Party include:

The General Secretary, which is the highest-ranking official within the Party and usually the Chinese Paramount leader.

The Politburo, consisting of 22 full members (including the members of the Politburo Standing Committee);

The Politburo Standing Committee, the most powerful decision-making body in China, which as of June 2020 consists of seven members;

The Secretariat, the principal administrative mechanism of the CPC, headed by the General Secretary;

The Central Military Commission;

The Central Discipline Inspection Commission, which is charged with rooting out corruption and malfeasance among party cadres.

Government

Main article: Government of China

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Politics of China" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

The primary organs of state power are the National People's Congress (NPC), the President, and the State Council. Members of the State Council include the Premier, a variable number of vice premiers (now four), five state councillors (protocol equal of vice premiers but with narrower portfolios), and 29 ministers and heads of State Council commissions. During the 1980s there was an attempt made to separate party and state functions, with the party deciding general policy and the state carrying it out. The attempt was abandoned in the 1990s with the result that the political leadership within the state are also the leaders of the party, thereby creating a single centralized locus of power.

At the same time, there has been a convention that party and state offices be separated at levels other than the central government, and it is unheard of for a sub-national executive to also be party secretary. The conflict has been often known to develop between the chief executive and the party secretary, and this conflict is widely seen as intentional to prevent either from becoming too dominant. Some special cases are the Special Administrative Regions of Hong Kong and Macau where the Communist Party does not function at all as part of the governmental system, and the autonomous regions where, following Soviet practice, the chief executive is typically a member of the local ethnic group while the party general secretary is non-local and usually Han Chinese.

Under the Constitution of China, the NPC is the highest organ of state power in China. It meets annually for about 2 weeks to review and approve major new policy directions, laws, the budget, and major personnel changes. Most national legislation in China is adopted by the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (NPCSC). Most initiatives are presented to the NPCSC for consideration by the State Council after previous endorsement by the Communist Party's Politburo Standing Committee. Although the NPC generally approves State Council policy and personnel recommendations, the NPC and its standing committee has increasingly asserted its role as the national legislature and has been able to force revisions in some laws. For example, the State Council and the Party have been unable to secure passage of a fuel tax to finance the construction of freeways.

Local government

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Currently, local government in China is structured in a hierarchy on four different levels. With the village being the grassroots (usually a hundred or so families), and not considered part of the hierarchy, local government advances through the township, county, prefecture or municipality, and the province as the geographical area of jurisdiction increases. Each level in the hierarchy is responsible for overseeing the work carried out by lower levels on the administrative strata. At each level are two important officials. A figure that represents the Communist Party of China, colloquially termed the Party chief or the Party Secretary, acts as the policy maker. This figure is appointed by their superiors. The head of the local People's Government, is, in theory, elected by the people. Usually called a governor, mayor, or magistrate, depending on the level, this figure acts to carry out the policies and most ceremonial duties. The distinction has evolved into a system where the Party Secretary is always in precedence above the leader of the People's Government.

After Deng Xiaoping took power in 1978 greater autonomy has been given to provinces in terms of economic policy implementation as well as other areas of policy such as education and transportation. As a result, some provincial authorities have evolved tendencies of operating on a de facto federal system with Beijing. Prominent examples of greater autonomy are seen in the provinces of Guangdong and Zhejiang, where local leaders do little to adhere to the strict standards issued by the Central Government, especially economic policy. In addition, conflicts have arisen in the relations of the central Party leaders with the few provincial-level Municipalities, most notably the municipal government of Shanghai and the rivalry between former Beijing mayor Chen Xitong and Jiang Zemin. The removal of Shanghai Municipality Party Secretary Chen Liangyu in September 2006 is the latest example.

China's system of autonomous regions and autonomous prefectures within provinces are formally intended to provide for greater autonomy by the ethnic group majority that inhabits the region. In practice, however, power rests with the Party secretary. Beijing will often appoint loyal party cadres to oversee the local work as Party secretary, while the local Chairman of the region's government is regarded as its nominal head. Power rests with the Party secretary. To avoid the solidification of local loyalties during a cadre's term in office, the central government freely and frequently transfers party cadres around different regions of the country, so a high ranking cadre's career might include service as governor or party secretary of several different provinces.

Administrative divisions

See also: Administrative divisions of China

Click any region for more info. For a larger version of this map, see here.

National armed forces

Main articles: People's Liberation Army, People's Armed Police, and Militia (China)

This section relies largely or entirely upon a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources.

Find sources: "Politics of China" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

The Communist Party of China created and leads the People’s Liberation Army. After the PRC was established in 1949, the PLA also became a state military. The state military system inherited and upholds the principle of the Communist Party’s absolute leadership over the people’s armed forces. The Party and the State jointly established the Central Military Commission that carries out the task of supreme military leadership over the armed forces.

The 1954 PRC Constitution provides that the State Chairman (President) directs the armed forces and made the State Chairman the chair of the Defense Commission (the Defense Commission is an advisory body, it does not lead the armed forces). On September 28, 1954, the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party re-established the Central Military Commission as the leader of the PLA and the people’s armed forces. From that time onwards, the system of joint Party and state military leadership was established. The Central Committee of the Communist Party leads in all military affairs. The State Chairman directs the state military forces and the development of the military forces managed by the State Council.

In December 2004, the fifth National People’s Congress revised the State Constitution to provide that the State Central Military Commission leads all the armed forces of the state. The chair of the State CMC is chosen and removed by the full NPC while the other members are chosen by the NPC Standing Committee. However, the CMC of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China remained the Party organization that directly leads the military and all the other armed forces. In actual practice, the Party CMC, after consultation with the democratic parties, proposes the names of the State CMC members of the NPC so that these people after going through the legal processes can be elected by the NPC to the State Central Military Commission. That is to say, that the CMC of the Central Committee and the CMC of the State are one group and one organization. However, looking at it organizationally, these two CMCs are subordinate to two different systems – the Party system and the State system. Therefore, the armed forces are under the absolute leadership of the Communist Party and are also the armed forces of the state. This is a unique Chinese system that ensures the joint leadership of the Communist Party and the state over the armed forces.

See also: List of wars involving the People's Republic of China

State leaders

See also: Paramount leader, List of national leaders of the People's Republic of China, Political position ranking of PRC, Politburo of the Communist Party of China, and Generations of Chinese leadership

Politburo Standing Committee

No.
Portrait
Information
Party position(s)
State position(s)

1st

 Name
 Xi Jinping
 General Secretary of the Communist Party of China

Chairman of the Central Military Commission of CPC
 President of the People's Republic of China

Chairman of the Central Military Commission of PRC

Birthplace
 Beijing

NPC Constituency
 Inner Mongolia at-large

Member since
 22 October 2007

2nd

 Name
 Li Keqiang
 Party Secretary of the State Council of the People's Republic of China
 Premier of the People's Republic of China

Birthplace
 Hefei, Anhui

NPC Constituency
 Guangxi at-large

Member since
 22 October 2007

3rd

 Name
 Li Zhanshu
 Party Secretary of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress
 Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress

Birthplace
 Pingshan County, Hebei

NPC Constituency
 Jiangxi at-large

Member since
 25 October 2017

4th

 Name
 Wang Yang
 Party Secretary of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference
 Chairman of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference

Birthplace
 Suzhou, Anhui

NPC Constituency
 Sichuan at-large

Member since
 25 October 2017

5th

 Name
 Wang Huning
 Top-ranked Secretary of the Central Secretariat of the CPC
 
Birthplace
 Shanghai

NPC Constituency
 Hebei at-large

Member since
 25 October 2017

6th

 Name
 Zhao Leji
 Secretary of the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection
 
Birthplace
 Xining, Qinghai

NPC Constituency
 Heilongjiang at-large

Member since
 25 October 2017

7th

 Name
 Han Zheng
 Deputy Party Secretary of the State Council of the People's Republic of China
 First Vice Premier of the People's Republic of China

Birthplace
 Shanghai

NPC Constituency
 Shaanxi at-large

Member since
 25 October 2017

Full Politburo members

Hanzi
Name
Year of birth
K
Office(s)

习近平
Xi Jinping
 1953

 —

 General Secretary of the Communist Party of China

President of the People's Republic of China

Chairman of the Central Military Commission

李克强
Li Keqiang
 1955

 —

 Premier of the State Council

栗战书
Li Zhanshu
 1950

 —

 Chairman of the National People's Congress Standing Committee

汪洋
Wang Yang
 1955

 —

 Chairman of the National Committee of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference

王沪宁
Wang Huning
 1955

 —

 Secretary of the Central Secretariat (first-ranked)

赵乐际
Zhao Leji
 1957

 —

 Secretary of the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection

韩正
Han Zheng
 1954

 —

 Vice Premier of the State Council (first-ranked)

丁薛祥
Ding Xuexiang
 1962

 —

 Director of the General Office

王晨
Wang Chen
 1950

 —

 Vice Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress

刘鹤
Liu He
 1952

 —

 Vice Premier of the State Council

许其亮
Xu Qiliang
 1950

 §
 Vice Chairman of the Central Military Commission

孙春兰
Sun Chunlan
 1950

 ♀
 Vice Premier of the State Council

李希
Li Xi
 1956

 —

 Party Secretary of Guangdong

李强
Li Qiang
 1959

 —

 Party Secretary of Shanghai

李鸿忠
Li Hongzhong
 1956

 —

 Party Secretary of Tianjin

胡春华
Hu Chunhua
 1963

 —

 Vice Premier of the State Council

杨洁篪
Yang Jiechi
 1950

 —

 Director of the Office of Foreign Affairs

杨晓渡
Yang Xiaodu
 1953

 —

 Director of the National Supervisory Commission

张又侠
Zhang Youxia
 1950

 §
 Vice Chairman of the Central Military Commission

陈希
Chen Xi
 1953

 —

 Head of the Organization Department

陈全国
Chen Quanguo
 1955

 —

 Party Secretary of the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region

陈敏尔
Chen Min'er
 1960

 —

 Party Secretary of Chongqing

郭声琨
Guo Shengkun
 1954

 —

 Secretary of the Political and Legal Affairs Commission

黄坤明
Huang Kunming
 1956

 —

 Head of the Propaganda Department

蔡奇
Cai Qi
 1955

 —

 Party Secretary of Beijing

Elections

Main article: Elections in the People's Republic of China

No substantial legal political opposition groups exist, and the country is mainly run by the Communist Party of China (CPC), but there are other political parties in the PRC, called "democratic parties", which participate in the People's Political Consultative Conference but mostly serve to endorse CPC policies. Even as there have been some moves in the direction of democratisation as far as the electoral system at least, in that openly contested People's Congress elections are now held at the village and town levels, and that legislatures have shown some assertiveness from time to time, the party retains effective control over governmental appointments. This is because the CPC wins by default in most electorates. The CPC has been enforcing its rule by clamping down on political dissidents as well as simultaneously attempting to reduce dissent by improving the economy and allowing public expression of people's personal grievances, provided that it is not within the agenda of any NGO or other groups openly or covertly opposing CPC ideals. Current political concerns in Mainland China include countering the growing gap between the wealthy and the poorer, and fighting corruption within the government leadership and its institutions. The support that the Communist Party of China has among the Chinese population in general is unclear because national elections are mostly CPC dominated, as there are no opposition political parties and independent candidates elected into office aren't organised well enough to realistically challenge CPC rule. Also, private conversations and anecdotal information often reveal conflicting views. However, according to a survey conducted in Hong Kong, where a relatively high level of freedom is enjoyed, the current CPC leaders have received substantial votes of support when its residents were asked to rank their favourite Chinese leaders from Mainland and Taiwan.

The eight registered minor parties have existed since before 1950. These parties all formally accept the leadership of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and their activities are directed by the United Front Work Department of the CPC. Their original function was to create the impression that the PRC was being ruled by a diverse national front, not a one-party dictatorship. The major role of these parties is to attract and subsequently muzzle niches in society that have political tendencies, such as academia. Although these parties are tightly controlled and do not challenge the Communist Party, members of the parties often individually are found in policy-making national institutions, and there is a convention that state institutions generally have at least one sinecure from a minor political party.

The minor parties include the Revolutionary Committee of the Chinese Guomindang, founded in 1948 by dissident members of the mainstream Kuomintang then under control of Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek; China Democratic League, created in 1941 by intellectuals in education and the arts; China Democratic National Construction Association, formed in 1945 by educators and national capitalists (industrialists and business people); China Association for Promoting Democracy, started in 1945 by intellectuals in cultural, education (primary and secondary schools), and publishing circles; Chinese Peasants' and Workers' Democratic Party, originated in 1930 by intellectuals in medicine, the arts, and education; China Party for Public Interest (China Zhi Gong Dang), founded in 1925 to attract the support of overseas Chinese; Jiusan Society, founded in 1945 by a group of college professors and scientists to commemorate the victory of the "international war against fascism" on September 3; and Taiwan Democratic Self-Government League, created in 1947 by "patriotic supporters of democracy who originated in Taiwan and now reside on the mainland."

Coordination between the eight registered minor parties and the Communist Party of China is done through the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference which meets annually in Beijing in March at about the same time that the National People's Congress meets. In addition, there are a few minor parties which either lack official recognition or are actively suppressed by the government, such as the Maoist Communist Party of China, China Democracy Party and China New Democracy Party, which have their headquarters outside of the Mainland China.

Legal system

Main article: Law of the People's Republic of China

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

The Chinese legal code is a complex amalgam of custom and statute, largely focused on criminal law, though a rudimentary civil code has been in effect since January 1, 1987, and new legal codes have been in effect since January 1, 1980. Continuing efforts are being made to improve civil, administrative, criminal, and commercial law.

Although the current law of China cannot be categorised by arbitrary rule, it is over-simplifying to describe it as a system of rule of law. While personal freedom and right to private property is nominally guaranteed by law, officials maintain the right to trespass citizens before proving or suspecting them breaking the law through the use of Droit administration. In other words, the concept of Habeas corpus does not apply in China. Also, Party members are subjected to different sets of law, namely the Constitution of the Communist Party of China, which authorises itself to use state apparatus to regulate behaviours of party members, sometimes overriding Law of the land. One of the most distinctive characteristics of Chinese law is the lack of a mechanism to verify the constitutionality of statute laws. This in effect allows the enactment of any administrative laws as long as circumstances justify.

The government's efforts to promote rule by law (not the same as rule of law) are significant and ongoing. After the Cultural Revolution, the PRC's leaders aimed to develop a legal system to restrain abuses of official authority and revolutionary excesses. In 1982, the National People's Congress adopted a new state constitution that emphasized the concept of rule by law by which party and state organizations are all subject to the law. (The importance of the rule by law was further elevated by a 1999 Constitutional amendment.) Many commentators have pointed out that the emphasis on rule by law increases rather than decreases the power of the Communist Party of China because the party, in its position of power, is in a better position to change the law to suit its own needs.

Since 1979, when the drive to establish a functioning legal system began, more than 301 laws and regulations, most of them in the economic area, have been promulgated. (After China's entry into the WTO, many new economically related laws have been put in place, while others have been amended.) The use of mediation committees - informed groups of citizens who resolve about 90% of the PRC's civil disputes and some minor criminal cases at no cost to the parties - is one innovative device. There are more than 800,000 such committees in both rural and urban areas.

Legal reform became a government priority in the 1990s. Legislation designed to modernize and professionalize the nation's lawyers, judges, and prisons was enacted. The 1994 Administrative Procedure Law allows citizens to sue officials for abuse of authority or malfeasance. In addition, the criminal law and the criminal procedures laws were amended to introduce significant reforms. The criminal law amendments abolished the crime of "counter-revolutionary" activity (and references to "counter-revolutionaries" disappeared with the passing of the 1999 Constitutional amendment), while criminal procedures reforms encouraged the establishment of a more transparent, adversarial trial process. The PRC Constitution and laws provide for fundamental human rights, including due process, although those laws also provide for limitations of those rights.

Although the human rights situation in mainland China has improved markedly since the 1960s (the 2004 Constitutional amendments specifically stressed that the State protects human rights), the government remains determined to prevent any organized opposition to its rule. Amnesty International estimates that the PRC holds several thousand political prisoners. Although illegal, there have been reports of torture by civil authorities.

Nationality and ethnicity

See also: Nationality Law of the People's Republic of China and Regional ethnic autonomy system of China

This section relies largely or entirely upon a single source. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources.

Find sources: "Politics of China" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (April 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Nationality is granted at birth to children with at least one Chinese-national parent, with some exceptions. In general, naturalization or the obtainment of the People's Republic of China nationality is difficult. The Nationality Law prescribes only three conditions for the obtainment of PRC nationality (marriage to a PRC national is one, permanent residence is another). If a PRC citizen voluntarily obtains a foreign nationality, he or she loses Chinese nationality automatically (yet this regulation does not apply to party members or government officials). If the citizen then wishes to resume PRC nationality, foreign nationality is no longer recognized. 

The PRC is officially a multi-ethnic state providing ethnic autonomy in the form of autonomous administrative entities. By law, ethnic minorities receive advantages in areas such as population control, school admissions, government employment, and military recruitment. The PRC recognises 56 nationalities in China and simultaneously categorises them as one hegemonic Chinese nation. However, separatist sentiment has occasionally flared in Tibet and Xinjiang. As such, independence groups and foreign human rights groups are critical of the PRC's policies in ethnic areas and have bemoaned the presence of Han Chinese (the main ethnic group of China) in Xinjiang and Tibet.

Foreign relations

Hu Jintao and US president George W. Bush, with first ladies Liu Yongqing and Laura Bush, wave from the White House. The relationship between the world's sole superpower United States and the emerging superpower status of the PRC is closely watched by international observers.

The Karakoram Highway connecting China and Pakistan is an example of China's international development involvements.

Main article: Foreign relations of China

The PRC maintains diplomatic relations with most countries in the world. In 1971, the PRC replaced the Republic of China, commonly known as "Taiwan" since the 1970s, as the sole representative of China in the United Nations and as one of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council. China had been represented by the Republic of China at the time of the UN's founding in 1945. (See also China and the United Nations.)

Under the One-China policy, the PRC has made it a precondition to establishing diplomatic relations that the other country acknowledges its claim to all of China, including Taiwan, and severs any official ties with the Republic of China (ROC) government. The government actively opposes foreign government meetings with the 14th Dalai Lama in a political capacity, as the spokesperson for a separatist movement in Tibet.

The PRC has been playing a leading role in calling for free trade areas and security pacts amongst its Asia-Pacific neighbours. In 2004, the PRC proposed an entirely new East Asia Summit (EAS) framework as a forum for regional security issues that pointedly excluded the United States. The EAS, which includes ASEAN Plus Three, India, Australia and New Zealand, held its inaugural summit in 2005. China is also a founder and member of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), alongside Russia and the Central Asian republics.

Much of the current foreign policy is based on the concept of "China's peaceful development". Nonetheless, crises in relations with foreign countries have occurred at various times in its recent history, particularly with the United States; e.g., the U.S. bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade during the Kosovo conflict in May 1999 and the Hainan Island incident in April 2001. China's foreign relations with many Western nations suffered for a time following the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989. A much troubled foreign relationship is that between China and Japan, which has been strained at times by Japan's refusal to acknowledge its wartime past to the satisfaction of the PRC, such as revisionistic comments made by prominent Japanese officials, and insufficient details given to the Nanjing Massacre and other atrocities committed during World War II in Japanese history textbooks. Another point of conflict between the two countries is the frequent visits by Japanese government officials to the Yasukuni Shrine, which honours not only Japanese World War II dead but also many convicted World War II war criminals, including 14 Class A convictions.

International disputes

The PRC is in a number of international territorial disputes, several of which involved the Sino-Russian border. Although the great majority of them are now resolved, China's territorial disputes have led to several localized wars in the last 50 years, including the Sino-Indian War in 1962, the Sino-Soviet border conflict in 1969 and the Sino-Vietnam War in 1979. In 2001, China and Russia signed the Treaty of Good-Neighborliness and Friendly Cooperation, which ended the conflict. Other territorial disputes include islands in the East and South China Seas, and undefined or disputed borders with India, Bhutan and North Korea.

Territorial disputes

 This section does not cite any sources. (April 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

The following territories are claimed by both China and one or more other countries:

Socotra Rock (with South Korea)

Diaoyu Islands (with Japan)

Spratly Islands (with Vietnam, Brunei, Malaysia, the Philippines)

Paracel Islands (with Vietnam)

Panatag Shoal (with the Philippines)

South Tibet - parts of Arunachal Pradesh and Assam (with India)

Aksai Chin - (with India).

In addition, the People's Republic of China and the Republic of China (Taiwan) share the 1992 Consensus that there is only "One China"; thus, each claims sovereignty over the entire territory of the other.

International organization participation

This section needs expansion with: an intro to this section: what do the organizations do in China, why are they on this list? You can help by adding to it. (April 2020)

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (April 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

AfDB, APEC, AsDB, BIS, CDB (non-regional), ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, International Maritime Organization, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, ITUC, LAIA (observer), MINURSO, NAM (observer), OPCW, PCA, SCO, United Nations, UN Security Council, UNAMSIL, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNITAR, UNTSO, UNU, UPU, WCO, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, Zangger Committee

See also

Politics of Hong Kong

Politics of Macau

Censorship in China

Chinese Socialist Democracy

People's organization

List of national leaders of the People's Republic of China

Notes

^ The office of the President is largely powerless, with the powers and functions under the Constitution of 1982 comparable to that of a constitutional monarch or a head of state in a parliamentary republic.

^ Xi Jinping was elected President of the People's Republic of China on 14 March 2013.

^ Recently, as of April 2020, Xi Jinping, the current general secretary of the Communist Party of China and paramount leader of China, has been accused of drawing to much power to himself. 

References

^ Ross, John (15 April 2015). "'Four Comprehensives' pillars of Xism". china.org.cn. Archived from the original on 16 April 2015. Retrieved 26 June 2019.

^ "How the Chinese government works". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 12 May 2018. Retrieved 12 May 2018. Xi Jinping is the most powerful figure in China's political system, and his influence mainly comes from his position as the General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party.

^ http://www.china.org.cn/english/chuangye/55414.htm National People's Congress system overview on China.org.cn

^ Krishna Kanta Handique State Open University Archived 2 May 2014 at the Wayback Machine, EXECUTIVE: THE PRESIDENT OF THE CHINESE REPUBLIC.

^ "Who's Who in China's New Communist Party Leadership Lineup - Bloomberg". Archived from the original on 24 October 2014. Retrieved 24 June 2019.

^ https://web.archive.org/web/20160729201558/http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-china-20322288

^ Phillips, Tom (26 February 2018). "'Dictator for life': Xi Jinping's power grab condemned as step towards tyranny". The Guardian. Retrieved 12 August 2019.

^ Anderlini, Jamil (11 October 2017). "Under Xi Jinping, China is turning back to dictatorship". Financial Times. Retrieved 12 August 2019.

^ Radchenko, Sergey (5 March 2018). "Dictatorship nearly destroyed China once. Will it do so again?". The Washington Post. Retrieved 12 August 2019.

^ Carrico, Kevin (2 April 2018). "A deepening dictatorship promises a grim future for China". East Asia Forum. Retrieved 12 August 2019.

^ Stelzer, Irwin (4 March 2018). "Emasculate America: The dictator's plan for world domination". The Times. Retrieved 12 August 2019.

^ "Kim Jong Un entertains Xi Jinping at home". The Economist. 21 June 2019. ISSN 0013-0613. Retrieved 17 August 2019. It was Mr Xi’s first visit to North Korea since he and Mr Kim took the helm of their respective countries... It is not known what precisely the two dictators discussed once they retired to a guest house for talks.

^ Mair, Victor H. (28 February 2018). "China's war on words show Xi Jinping is a dictator for life | Opinion". Newsweek. Retrieved 17 August 2019.

^ Hein, Matthias (26 February 2018). "Opinion: Xi Jinping – Today's chairman, tomorrow's dictator?". Deutsche Welle. Retrieved 17 August 2019.

^ Cohen, Jerome A. (28 February 2018). "China Is Likely to Enter Another Long Period of Severe Dictatorship". Council on Foreign Relations. Retrieved 17 August 2019.

^ Patten, Chris (30 July 2019). "Great Countries, Bad Leaders". Project Syndicate. Retrieved 17 August 2019. Moreover, Xi is deploying cutting-edge technology to reinforce his dictatorship.

^ Feldman, Noah (27 February 2018). "China Now Faces the Downsides of Dictatorship". Bloomberg. Retrieved 17 August 2019.

^ Tisdall, Simon (23 November 2018). "The Chinese export we really should be worried about: repression". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 17 August 2019. What is different, and underappreciated in the west, is the way Xi is inexorably and single-mindedly expanding draconian systems of social control centred on the Communist party and the de facto dictatorship of one man: himself.

^ He, Qinglian (1996). 现代化的陷阱  (in Chinese). PRC.

^ "Hong Kong's Missing Booksellers". 22 January 2016. Archived from the original on 7 October 2016. Retrieved 28 February 2016.

^ Yang, Dali. Remaking the Chinese Leviathan, Stanford University Press, 2004.

^ Boum, Aomar (1999). Journal of Political Ecology: Case Studies in History and Society Archived 23 November 2004 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved April 18, 2006.

^ Part I of summary of Zhou Tianyong's 2004 book Reform of the Chinese Political System Archived 27 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine Accessed February 7, 2007.

^ Part II of summary of Zhou Tianyong's 2004 book Reform of the Chinese Political System Archived 13 February 2007 at the Wayback Machine Accessed February 7, 2007.

^ "The Development of Socialist Consultative Democracy in China _ Qiushi Journal". english.qstheory.cn. Archived from the original on 9 March 2017. Retrieved 13 May 2018.

^ "Socialist Consultative Democracy_参考网". www.fx361.com. Archived from the original on 14 May 2018. Retrieved 13 May 2018.

^ a b c "Consultative democracy should be highlighted | Politics". www.chinadaily.com.cn. Archived from the original on 18 September 2018. Retrieved 13 May 2018.

^ Bell, Daniel A. "Chinese Democracy Isn't Inevitable". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 14 May 2018. Retrieved 13 May 2018.

^ "The National People's Congress of the People's Republic of China". www.npc.gov.cn. Archived from the original on 5 May 2018. Retrieved 13 May 2018.

^ "Backgrounder: The Communist Party of China". News of the Communist Party of China. Archived from the original on 1 October 2011. Retrieved 25 June 2011.

^ "Backgrounder: 中国共产党第十九届中央领导机构". www.goc.cn. Archived from the original on 4 June 2020. Retrieved 12 July 2020.

^ "PDF China Monitor Nummer 37 en - Mercator Institute for China Studies". www.merics.org (in German). Archived from the original on 25 March 2017. Retrieved 25 March 2017.

^ a b Pu Xingzu, Chapter 11, The State Military System in "The Political System of the People's Republic of China",(Zhonghua Renmin Gongheguo Zhengzhi Zhidu) Chief Editor Pu Xingzu, Shanghai, 2005, Shanghai People’s Publishing House. ISBN 7-208-05566-1

^ a b Beijingers get greater poll choices Archived 5 April 2007 at the Wayback Machine, China Daily, December 8, 2003

^ "Does China’s Land-Tenure System Discourage Structural Adjustment?" Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine, Lohmar & Somwaru, USDA Economic Research Service, 1 May 2006. Accessed 3 May 2006.

^ China sounds alarm over fast-growing gap between rich and poor Archived 13 February 2006 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved April 16, 2006.

^ "HKU POP SITE releases the latest ratings of the top 10 political figures in Mainland China and Taiwan as well as people's appraisal of past Chinese leaders" Archived 18 May 2006 at the Wayback Machine. 4 April 2006. HKU POP. Accessed 3 May 2006.

^ https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/ch.html Archived 13 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine CIA - The World Factbook -- China, retrieved December 12, 2007.

^ Section 6 of Chapter 3 (Articles 112-122) of the Constitution of China, further specified under the Law of the People's Republic of China on Ethnical Regional Autonomy System

^ Eddy Chang (Aug 22, 2004). Perseverance will pay off at the UN Archived 6 August 2007 at the Wayback Machine, The Taipei Times, August 22, 2004

^ Dillon, Dana and John Tkacik Jr, "China’s Quest for Asia" Archived 10 February 2006 at the Wayback Machine, Policy Review, December 2005 and January 2006, Issue No. 134. Accessed 22 April 2006.

^ Treaty of Good-Neighborliness and Friendly Cooperation Archived 26 August 2006 at the Wayback Machine (March 21, 2006). Retrieved April 16, 2006.

Bibliography

Sebastian Heilmann and Elizabeth J. Perry, editors, Mao's Invisible Hand: The Political Foundations of Adaptive Governance in China, Harvard University Asia Center (May 1, 2011), trade paperback, 336 pages, ISBN 0674060636

Sebastian Heilmann, editor, China's Political System, Lanham, Boulder, New York, London: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers (2017) ISBN 978-1442277342 and ISBN 1442277343

External links

This section's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references. (April 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

China Politics Links

The Central Chinese Government's Official Web Portal

Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of China

Embassy of the People's Republic of China in the United States

Chinese Legislative Information Network System full-text search of English translations of hundreds of PRC laws and regulations

PRC government new items in English from PRC government official website

Chinaview from the Xinhua News Agency

People's Daily Online in English

PLA Daily English news

China Daily in English

Inside China's Ruling Party (BBC)

Is China really a Communist state? (CNN)

New York Times article of September 5, 2002 on Succession of Rule in China

Chinese Officials Lighten Up Under Pressure (China Today)

Primer on China's Leadership Transition

v

t

e

Politics of the People's Republic of China

Constitution

Laws

United Front 
Parties

Communist Party
Central Committee
Politburo
Standing Committee
General Secretary

Central Secretariat

Central Military Commission

Central Commission for Discipline Inspection

Provincial party standing committee

People's Political Consultative Conference
Chairperson

Central

government 
National People's Congress
Standing Committee

Chairman

President
Vice-President

State Council
Premier

Vice-Premiers

State Councilors

Ministries

Central Military Commission
Chairman

People's Liberation Army

People's Armed Police

National Supervisory Commission

Supreme People's Court

Supreme People's Procuratorate

Politics of

province-level

divisions

(current leaders)

Municipalities 
Beijing

Chongqing

Shanghai

Tianjin

Provinces 
Anhui

Fujian

Gansu

Guangdong

Guizhou

Hainan

Hebei

Heilongjiang

Henan

Hubei

Hunan

Jiangsu

Jiangxi

Jilin

Liaoning

Qinghai

Shaanxi

Shandong

Shanxi

Sichuan

Yunnan

Zhejiang

Autonomous

regions 
Guangxi

Inner Mongolia

Ningxia

Xinjiang

Tibet (leaders)

SARs 
Hong Kong

Macau

Claimed province 
Taiwan

See also

Elections

v

t

e

China articles

History

Timeline

Ancient China (outline) (2070–221 BCE)

Imperial China (political systems) (221 BCE – 1912 CE)

Modern China (1912 CE – present)

Republic (1912–1949)

People's Republic (1949–present)
1949–1976

1976–1989

1989–2002

2002–present

Chronology

Hundred Days' Reform

1911 Revolution

Kuomintang

New Culture Movement

Second Sino-Japanese War

War of Liberation

Korean War

Sino-Soviet split

Cultural Revolution

Reform and opening

Sino-Vietnamese War

1989 Protests

Chinese space program

One country, two systems

Geography

Borders

Extreme points

Geology

Natural disasters

Regions
East

Northeast

North

South Central
Central

South

Western
Northwest

Southwest

Terrain 
Bays

Canyons

Caves

Deserts

Grasslands

Hills

Islands

Mountains
ranges

passes

Peninsulas

Northeast / North / Central Plains

Valleys

Volcanoes

Water 
Canals

Lakes

Rivers

Waterfalls

Wetlands

Water resources

Seas
Bohai

Yellow

East China

South China

Ecosystem 
Protected areas

National parks

Nature reserves

UNESCO Biosphere Reserves

Wildlife
Fauna

Flora

Subdivisions 
Baseline islands

Border crossings

Cities

Province-level subdivisions

Politics

Law 
Judicial system

Human rights
LGBT

Tibet

Macao

Hong Kong

Law enforcement

Naming laws

Nationality law

Penal system

Government 
Civil service

Constitution

Elections

Environmental policy

Foreign relations

National People's Congress
Standing Committee

National security

Political parties and movements
Communist Party
General Secretary

Politburo

Democratic Parties

Anti-democratisation

Pro-democratisation

President
Vice President

State Council
Premier

Vice Premier

Military 
Central Military Commission

People's Liberation Army
Ground

Navy

Air

Rocket

Strategic Support

People's Armed Police
Coast Guard

Militia
Maritime Militia

Economy

Agriculture

Banking
Central bank

Economic history

Energy

Finance system

Foreign aid received

Foreign aid program

Historical GDP

Poverty

Reform

Renminbi (currency)

Science and technology
history

Special Economic Zones (SEZs)

Standard of living

Telecommunications

Tourism

Transport

Culture

Archaeology

Archives

Art

Cinema

Cuisine

Dance

Gardens

Libraries

Martial arts

Media

Music

Parks

Philosophy

Religion

Smoking

Sports

Tea culture

Tourism

Variety arts

Historical and Cultural Site
World Heritage Sites

Literature

Society 
Anthem

Chinese Dream

Corruption

Crime

Emblem

Education

Flag

"Generation Y"

Harmonious Socialist Society

HIV/AIDS

Intellectualism

Languages

Poverty

Prostitution

Public health
food safety
incidents

Public holidays

Rural life

Sex trafficking

Sexuality

Socialism with Chinese characteristics

Social issues

Social relations

Social structure

Social welfare

Suicide

Terrorism

Time zones

Urban life

Water supply and sanitation

Women

Xiaokang (middle-class)

Primary stage of socialism

Demographics 
Emigration

Ethnic groups

Internal migration

Statistics

Urbanization

Outline

Category

Portal

v

t

e

Politics of Asia

Sovereign states 
Afghanistan

Armenia

Azerbaijan

Bahrain

Bangladesh

Bhutan

Brunei

Cambodia

China

Cyprus

East Timor (Timor-Leste)

Egypt

Georgia

India

Indonesia

Iran

Iraq

Israel

Japan

Jordan

Kazakhstan

North Korea

South Korea

Kuwait

Kyrgyzstan

Laos

Lebanon

Malaysia

Maldives

Mongolia

Myanmar

Nepal

Oman

Pakistan

Philippines

Qatar

Russia

Saudi Arabia

Singapore

Sri Lanka

Syria

Tajikistan

Thailand

Turkey

Turkmenistan

United Arab Emirates

Uzbekistan

Vietnam

Yemen

States with

limited recognition 
Abkhazia

Artsakh

Northern Cyprus

Palestine

South Ossetia

Taiwan

Dependencies and

other territories 
British Indian Ocean Territory

Christmas Island

Cocos (Keeling) Islands

Hong Kong

Macau

 Book

 Category

 Asia portal

Politics portal

China portal

Communism portal
