"Span of time before recorded history

For other uses, see Prehistory (disambiguation).

For other timelines, see Timelines of world history.

 Part of a series on

Human history

and prehistory

↑ before Homo (Pliocene epoch)

Prehistory

(three-age system)

Stone Age

Lower Paleolithic

Homo

Homo erectus

Middle Paleolithic

Early Homo sapiens

Upper Paleolithic

Behavioral modernity

Epipaleolithic

Mesolithic

Neolithic

Cradle of civilization

Protohistory

Chalcolithic

Bronze Age

Near East

Europe

India

China

Bronze Age collapse

Iron Age

Near East

Europe

India

East Asia

West Africa

Recorded history

Ancient history

Earliest records

Protohistory

Post-classical history

Modern history

Early

Late

Contemporary

↓ Future (Holocene epoch)

v

t

e

Human prehistory is the period between the use of the first stone tools by hominins c. 3.3 million years ago and the invention of writing systems. The use of symbols, marks, and images appears very early among humans, but the earliest known writing systems appeared c. 5,300 years ago and it took thousands of years for writing systems to be widely adopted. In some human cultures, writing systems were not used until the nineteenth century and, in a few, not even until the present. The end of prehistory therefore came at very different dates in different places, and the term is less often used in discussing societies where prehistory ended relatively recently.

Sumer in Mesopotamia, the Indus valley civilization, and ancient Egypt were the first civilizations to develop their own scripts and to keep historical records; this took place already during the early Bronze Age. Neighboring civilizations were the first to follow. Most other civilizations reached the end of prehistory during the Iron Age. The three-age system of division of prehistory into the Stone Age, followed by the Bronze Age and Iron Age, remains in use for much of Eurasia and North Africa, but is not generally used in those parts of the world where the working of hard metals arrived abruptly from contact with Eurasian cultures, such as Oceania, Australasia, much of Sub-Saharan Africa, and parts of the Americas. With some exceptions in Pre-Columbian civilizations in the Americas, these areas did not develop complex writing systems before the arrival of Eurasians, so their prehistory reaches into relatively recent periods; for example, 1788 is usually taken as the end of the prehistory of Australia.

The period when a culture is written about by others, but has not developed its own writing system is often known as the protohistory of the culture. By definition, there are no written records from human prehistory, so dating of prehistoric materials is crucial. Clear techniques for dating were not well-developed until the nineteenth century.

This article is concerned with human prehistory, the time since behaviorally and anatomically modern humans first appeared until the beginning of recorded history. Earlier periods are also called "prehistoric"; there are separate articles for the overall history of the Earth and the history of life before humans.

Contents

1 Definition

1.1 History of the term

2 Means of research

3 Stone Age

3.1 Palaeolithic

3.2 Mesolithic

3.3 Neolithic

3.4 Chalcolithic

4 Transition into ancient history

4.1 Bronze Age

4.2 Iron Age

5 Timeline

6 By region

7 See also

8 References

9 External links

Definition

Massive stone pillars at Göbekli Tepe, in southeast Turkey, erected for ritual use by early Neolithic people 11,000 years ago

An early sketch imagining an adult and a juvenile from prehistoric times making a stone tool

A nineteenth century concept of early humans in a wilderness

Beginning

The term "prehistory" can refer to the vast span of time since the beginning of the Universe or the Earth, but more often it refers to the period since life appeared on Earth, or even more specifically to the time since human-like beings appeared.

End

The date marking the end of prehistory is typically defined as the advent of the contemporary written historical record. The date consequently varies widely from region to region depending on the date when relevant records become a useful academic resource. For example, in Egypt it is generally accepted that prehistory ended around 3200 BCE, whereas in New Guinea the end of the prehistoric era is set much more recently, at around 1900 common era. In Europe the relatively well-documented classical cultures of Ancient Greece and Ancient Rome had neighbouring cultures, including the Celts and to a lesser extent the Etruscans, with little or no writing, and historians must decide how much weight to give to the often highly prejudiced accounts of these "prehistoric" cultures in Greek and Roman literature.

Time periods

In dividing up human prehistory in Eurasia, historians typically use the three-age system, whereas scholars of pre-human time periods typically use the well-defined geologic record and its internationally defined stratum base within the geologic time scale. The three-age system is the periodization of human prehistory into three consecutive time periods, named for their respective predominant tool-making technologies:
Stone Age

Bronze Age

Iron Age

History of the term

The notion of "prehistory" began to surface during the Enlightenment in the work of antiquarians who used the word 'primitive' to describe societies that existed before written records. The first use of the word prehistory in English, however, occurred in the Foreign Quarterly Review in 1836.

The use of the geologic time scale for pre-human time periods, and of the three-age system for human prehistory, is a system that emerged during the late nineteenth century in the work of British, German, and Scandinavian anthropologists, archeologists, and antiquarians.

Means of research

The main source of information for prehistory is archaeology (a branch of anthropology), but some scholars are beginning to make more use of evidence from the natural and social sciences. This view has been articulated by advocates of deep history.

The primary researchers into human prehistory are archaeologists and physical anthropologists who use excavation, geologic and geographic surveys, and other scientific analysis to reveal and interpret the nature and behavior of pre-literate and non-literate peoples. Human population geneticists and historical linguists are also providing valuable insight for these questions. Cultural anthropologists help provide context for societal interactions, by which objects of human origin pass among people, allowing an analysis of any article that arises in a human prehistoric context. Therefore, data about prehistory is provided by a wide variety of natural and social sciences, such as anthropology, archaeology, archaeoastronomy, comparative linguistics,biology, geology, molecular genetics, paleontology, palynology, physical anthropology, and many others.

Human prehistory differs from history not only in terms of its chronology, but in the way it deals with the activities of archaeological cultures rather than named nations or individuals. Restricted to material processes, remains, and artifacts rather than written records, prehistory is anonymous. Because of this, reference terms that prehistorians use, such as "Neanderthal" or "Iron Age", are modern labels with definitions sometimes subject to debate.

Stone Age

The concept of a "Stone Age" is found useful in the archaeology of most of the world, although in the archaeology of the Americas it is called by different names and begins with a Lithic stage, or sometimes Paleo-Indian. The sub-divisions described below are used for Eurasia, and not consistently across the whole area.

Palaeolithic

Main article: Paleolithic

Proposed map of early human migrations, according to mitochondrial population genetics with numbers that are millennia before the present (its accuracy is disputed)

"Palaeolithic" means "Old Stone Age", and begins with the first use of stone tools. The Paleolithic is the earliest period of the Stone Age.

The early part of the Palaeolithic is called the Lower Palaeolithic, which predates Homo sapiens, beginning with Homo habilis (and related species) and the earliest stone tools, dated to around 2.5 million years ago. Evidence of control of fire by early humans during the Lower Palaeolithic Era is uncertain and has at best limited scholarly support. The most widely accepted claim is that H. erectus or H. ergaster made fires between 790,000 and 690,000 BP (before the present period) in a site at Bnot Ya'akov Bridge, Israel. The use of fire enabled early humans to cook food, provide warmth, and have a light source at night.

Early Homo sapiens originated some 200,000 years ago, ushering in the Middle Palaeolithic. Anatomic changes indicating modern language capacity also arise during the Middle Palaeolithic. During the Middle Palaeolithic Era, there is the first definitive evidence of human use of fire. Sites in Zambia have charred bone and wood that have been dated to 61,000 BP. The systematic burial of the dead, music, early art, and the use of increasingly sophisticated multi-part tools are highlights of the Middle Paleolithic.

Throughout the Palaeolithic, humans generally lived as nomadic hunter-gatherers. Hunter-gatherer societies tended to be very small and egalitarian, although hunter-gatherer societies with abundant resources or advanced food-storage techniques sometimes developed sedentary lifestyles with complex social structures such as chiefdoms, and social stratification. Long-distance contacts may have been established, as in the case of Indigenous Australian "highways" known as songlines.

Mesolithic

Main article: Mesolithic

Dugout canoe

The Mesolithic, or Middle Stone Age (from the Greek mesos, 'middle', and lithos, 'stone'), was a period in the development of human technology between the Palaeolithic and Neolithic periods of the Stone Age.

The Mesolithic period began at the end of the Pleistocene epoch, some 10,000 BP, and ended with the introduction of agriculture, the date of which varied by geographic region. In some areas, such as the Near East, agriculture was already underway by the end of the Pleistocene, and there the Mesolithic is short and poorly defined. In areas with limited glacial impact, the term "Epipalaeolithic" is sometimes preferred.

Regions that experienced greater environmental effects as the last ice age ended have a much more evident Mesolithic era, lasting millennia. In Northern Europe, societies were able to live well on rich food supplies from the marshlands fostered by the warmer climate. Such conditions produced distinctive human behaviours that are preserved in the material record, such as the Maglemosian and Azilian cultures. These conditions also delayed the coming of the Neolithic until as late as 4000 BCE (6,000 BP) in northern Europe.

Remains from this period are few and far between, often limited to middens. In forested areas, the first signs of deforestation have been found, although this would only begin in earnest during the Neolithic, when more space was needed for agriculture.

The Mesolithic is characterized in most areas by small composite flint tools: microliths and microburins. Fishing tackle, stone adzes, and wooden objects, e.g. canoes and bows, have been found at some sites. These technologies first occur in Africa, associated with the Azilian cultures, before spreading to Europe through the Ibero-Maurusian culture of Northern Africa and the Kebaran culture of the Levant. However, independent discovery is not ruled out.

Neolithic

Main article: Neolithic

Entrance to the Ġgantija phase temple complex of Ħaġar Qim, Malta, 3900 BCE 

An array of Neolithic artifacts, including bracelets, axe heads, chisels, and polishing tools - Neolithic stone artifacts are by definition polished and, except for specialty items, not chipped

"Neolithic" means "New Stone Age". Although there were several species of human beings during the Paleolithic, by the Neolithic only Homo sapiens sapiens remained. (Homo floresiensis may have survived right up to the very dawn of the Neolithic, about 12,200 years ago.) This was a period of primitive technological and social development. It began about 10,200 BCE in some parts of the Middle East, and later in other parts of the world and ended between 4,500 and 2,000 BCE. The Neolithic is a progression of behavioral and cultural characteristics and changes, including the use of wild and domestic crops and of domesticated animals.

Early Neolithic farming was limited to a narrow range of plants, both wild and domesticated, which included einkorn wheat, millet and spelt, and the keeping of dogs, sheep, and goats. By about 6,900–6,400 BCE, it included domesticated cattle and pigs, the establishment of permanently or seasonally inhabited settlements, and the use of pottery. The Neolithic period saw the development of early villages, agriculture, animal domestication, tools, and the onset of the earliest recorded incidents of warfare. The Neolithic era commenced with the beginning of farming, which produced the "Neolithic Revolution". It ended when metal tools became widespread (in the Copper Age or Bronze Age; or, in some geographical regions, in the Iron Age). The term Neolithic is commonly used in the Old World, as its application to cultures in the Americas and Oceania that did not fully develop metal-working technology raises problems.

The monumental building at Luni sul Mignone in Blera, Italy, 3500 BCE

Settlements became more permanent with some having circular houses with single rooms made of mudbrick. Settlements might have a surrounding stone wall to keep domesticated animals in and protect the inhabitants from other tribes. Later settlements have rectangular mud-brick houses where the family lived together in single or multiple rooms. Burial findings suggest an ancestor cult where people preserved skulls of the dead. The Vinča culture may have created the earliest system of writing. The megalithic temple complexes of Ġgantija are notable for their gigantic structures. Although some late Eurasian Neolithic societies formed complex stratified chiefdoms or even states, states evolved in Eurasia only with the rise of metallurgy, and most Neolithic societies on the whole were relatively simple and egalitarian. Most clothing appears to have been made of animal skins, as indicated by finds of large numbers of bone and antler pins which are ideal for fastening leather. Wool cloth and linen might have become available during the later Neolithic, as suggested by finds of perforated stones that (depending on size) may have served as spindle whorls or loom weights.

Chalcolithic

Main article: Chalcolithic

Artist's impression of a Copper Age walled city, Los Millares, Iberia

In Old World archaeology, the "Chalcolithic", "Eneolithic", or "Copper Age" refers to a transitional period where early copper metallurgy appeared alongside the widespread use of stone tools. During this period, some weapons and tools were made of copper. This period was still largely Neolithic in character. It is a phase of the Bronze Age before it was discovered that adding tin to copper formed the harder bronze. The Copper Age was originally defined as a transition between the Neolithic and the Bronze Age. However, because it is characterized by the use of metals, the Copper Age is considered a part of the Bronze Age rather than the Stone Age.

Chalcolithic copper mine in Timna Valley, Negev Desert, Israel

An archaeological site in Serbia contains the oldest securely dated evidence of copper making at high temperature, from 7,500 years ago. The find in June 2010 extends the known record of copper smelting by about 800 years, and suggests that copper smelting may have been invented independently in separate parts of Asia and Europe at that time, rather than spreading from a single source. The emergence of metallurgy may have occurred first in the Fertile Crescent, where it gave rise to the Bronze Age in the 4th millennium BCE (the traditional view), although finds from the Vinča culture in Europe have now been securely dated to slightly earlier than those of the Fertile Crescent. Timna Valley contains evidence of copper mining 9,000 to 7,000 years ago. The process of transition from Neolithic to Chalcolithic in the Middle East is characterized in archaeological stone tool assemblages by a decline in high quality raw material procurement and use. North Africa and the Nile Valley imported its iron technology from the Near East and followed the Near Eastern course of Bronze Age and Iron Age development. However the Iron Age and Bronze Age occurred simultaneously in much of Africa.

Transition into ancient history

Further information: Protohistory and Ancient history

Bronze Age

Main article: Bronze Age

An image of an ox-drawn plow is accompanied by script, Egypt, c. 1200 BCE

The Bronze Age is the earliest period in which some civilizations have reached the end of prehistory, by introducing written records. The Bronze Age or parts thereof are thus considered to be part of prehistory only for the regions and civilizations who adopted or developed a system of keeping written records during later periods. The invention of writing coincides in some areas with the early beginnings of the Bronze Age. Soon after the appearance of writing, people started creating texts including written accounts of events and records of administrative matters.

The term Bronze Age refers to a period in human cultural development when the most advanced metalworking (at least in systematic and widespread use) included techniques for smelting copper and tin from naturally occurring outcroppings of ores, and then combining them to cast bronze. These naturally occurring ores typically included arsenic as a common impurity. Copper and tin ores are rare, as reflected in the fact that there were no tin bronzes in Western Asia before 3000 BCE. The Bronze Age forms part of the three-age system for prehistoric societies. In this system, it follows the Neolithic in some areas of the world.

While copper is a common ore, deposits of tin are rare in the Old World, and often had to be traded or carried considerable distances from the few mines, stimulating the creation of extensive trading routes. In many areas as far apart as China and England, the valuable new material was used for weapons but for a long time apparently not available for agricultural tools. Much of it seems to have been hoarded by social elites, and sometimes deposited in extravagant quantities, from Chinese ritual bronzes and Indian copper hoards to European hoards of unused axe-heads.

By the end of the Bronze Age large states, which are often called empires, had arisen in Egypt, China, Anatolia (the Hittites), and Mesopotamia, all of them literate.

Iron Age

Main articles: Iron Age and Classical antiquity

The Iron Age is not part of prehistory for all civilizations who had introduced written records during the Bronze Age. Most remaining civilizations did so during the Iron Age, often through conquest by the empires, which continued to expand during this period. For example, in most of Europe conquest by the Roman Empire means that the term Iron Age is replaced by "Roman", "Gallo-Roman", and similar terms after the conquest.

In archaeology, the Iron Age refers to the advent of ferrous metallurgy. The adoption of iron coincided with other changes in some past cultures, often including more sophisticated agricultural practices, religious beliefs and artistic styles, which makes the archaeological Iron Age coincide with the "Axial Age" in the history of philosophy. Although iron ore is common, the metalworking techniques necessary to use iron are very different from those needed for the metal used earlier, and iron was slow-spreading and for long mainly used for weapons, while bronze remained typical for tools, as well as art.

Timeline

Hominin timeline

This box: view

talk

edit

-10 —

–

-9 —

–

-8 —

–

-7 —

–

-6 —

–

-5 —

–

-4 —

–

-3 —

–

-2 —

–

-1 —

–

0 —

Hominini

Nakalipithecus

Ouranopithecus

Oreopithecus

Sahelanthropus

Orrorin

Ardipithecus

Australopithecus

Homo habilis

Homo erectus

H. heidelbergensis

Homo sapiens

Neanderthals

←

Earlier apes

←

Gorilla split

←

Possibly bipedal

←

Chimpanzee split

←

Earliest bipedal

←

Stone tools

←

Expansion beyond Africa

←

Earliest fire use

←

Earliest cooking

←

Earliest clothes

←

Modern humans

P

l

e

i

s

t

o

c

e

n

e

P

l

i

o

c

e

n

e

M

i

o

c

e

n

e

H

o

m

i

n

i

d

s

Clickable

(million years ago)

(See also: Life timeline and Nature timeline.)

Further information: Timeline of human evolution, Timeline of the Stone Age, and Timeline of human prehistory

All dates are approximate and conjectural, obtained through research in the fields of anthropology, archaeology, genetics, geology, or linguistics. They are all subject to revision due to new discoveries or improved calculations. BP stands for "Before Present (1950)." BCE stands for Before Common Era".

Lower Paleolithic

c. 2.8 million BP – Genus Homo appears

c. 2.5 million BP – Evidence of early human tools

c. 600,000 BP – Hunting-gathering

c. 400,000 BP – Control of fire by early humans

Middle Paleolithic

c. 300,000–30,000 BP – Mousterian (Neanderthal) culture in Europe.

c. 200,000 BP – Anatomically modern humans (Homo sapiens sapiens) appear in Africa, one of whose characteristics is a lack of significant body hair compared to other primates. See e.g. Omo remains.

c. 170,000–83,000 BP – Invention of clothing

c. 75,000 BP – Toba Volcano supereruption.

c. 80,000–50,000 BP – Homo sapiens exit Africa as a single population. In the next millennia, descendants from this population migrate to southern India, the Malay islands, Australia, Japan, China, Siberia, Alaska, and the northwestern coast of North America.

c. 80,000–50,000? BP – Behavioral modernity, by this point including language and sophisticated cognition

Upper Paleolithic

c. 45,000 BP / 43,000 BCE – Beginnings of Châtelperronian culture in France.

c. 40,000 BP / 38,000 BCE – First human settlement in the southern half of the Australian mainland, by indigenous Australians (including the future sites of Sydney, Perth, and Melbourne.)

c. 32,000 BP / 30,000 BCE – Beginnings of Aurignacian culture, exemplified by the cave paintings ("parietal art") of Chauvet Cave in France.

c. 30,500 BP / 28,500 BCE – New Guinea is populated by colonists from Asia or Australia.

c. 30,000 BP / 28,000 BCE – A herd of reindeer is slaughtered and butchered by humans in the Vezere Valley in what is today France.

c. 28,000–20,000 BP – Gravettian period in Europe. Harpoons, needles, and saws invented.

c. 26,500 BP – Last Glacial Maximum (LGM). Subsequently, the ice melts and the glaciers retreat again (Late Glacial Maximum). During this latter period human beings return to Western Europe (see Magdalenian culture) and enter North America from Eastern Siberia for the first time (see Paleo-Indians, pre-Clovis culture and Settlement of the Americas).

c. 26,000 BP / 24,000 BCE – People around the world use fibers to make baby-carriers, clothes, bags, baskets, and nets.

c. 25,000 BP / 23,000 BCE – A settlement consisting of huts built of rocks and mammoth bones is founded near what is now Dolní Věstonice in Moravia in the Czech Republic. This is the oldest human permanent settlement that has been found by archaeologists.

c. 23,000 BP / 21,000 BCE – Small-scale trial cultivation of plants in Ohalo II, a hunter-gatherers' sedentary camp on the shore of the Sea of Galilee, Israel.

c. 16,000 BP / 14,000 BCE – Wisent sculpted in clay deep inside the cave now known as Le Tuc d'Audoubert in the French Pyrenees near what is now the border of Spain.

c. 14,800 BP / 12,800 BCE – The Humid Period begins in North Africa. The region that would later become the Sahara is wet and fertile, and the Aquifers are full.

Mesolithic/Epipaleolithic

c. 12,500 to 9,500 BCE – Natufian culture: a culture of sedentary hunter-gatherers who may have cultivated Rye in the Levant (Eastern Mediterranean)

Neolithic

c. 9,400–9,200 BCE – Figs of a parthenocarpic (and therefore sterile) type are cultivated in the early Neolithic village Gilgal I (in the Jordan Valley, 13 km north of Jericho). The find predates the domestication of wheat, barley, and legumes, and may thus be the first known instance of agriculture.

c. 9,000 BCE – Circles of T-shaped stone pillars erected at Göbekli Tepe in the Southeastern Anatolia Region of Turkey during pre-pottery Neolithic A (PPNA) period. As yet unexcavated structures at the site are thought to date back to the epipaleolithic.

c. 8,000 BC / 7000 BCE – In northern Mesopotamia, now northern Iraq, cultivation of barley and wheat begins. At first they are used for beer, gruel, and soup, eventually for bread. In early agriculture at this time the planting stick is used, but it is replaced by a primitive plow in subsequent centuries. Around this time, a round stone tower, now preserved at about 8.5 meters high and 8.5 meters in diameter is built in Jericho.

Chalcolithic

c. 3,700 BCE – Cuneiform writing appears in Sumer, and records begin to be kept. According to the majority of specialists, the first Mesopotamian writing was a tool that had little connection to the spoken language.

c. 3,300 BCE – Approximate date of death of "Ötzi the Iceman", found preserved in ice in the Ötztal Alps in 1991. A copper-bladed axe, which is a characteristic technology of this era, was found with the corpse.

c. 3,000 BCE – Stonehenge construction begins. In its first version, it consisted of a circular ditch and bank, with 56 wooden posts.

By region

Old World

Prehistoric Africa
Predynastic Egypt

Prehistoric Central North Africa

Prehistoric Asia
East Asia:
Prehistoric China

Prehistoric Korea

Japanese Paleolithic

East Asian Bronze Age

Chinese Bronze Age

South Asia
Prehistory of India

South Asian Stone Age

Prehistory of Sri Lanka

Prehistory of Central Asia

Prehistoric Siberia

Southeast Asia:
Prehistoric Indonesia

Prehistoric Thailand

Southwest Asia (Near East)
Prehistory of Iran

Aurignacian

Natufian culture

Ubaid period

Uruk period

Ancient Near East

Prehistoric Europe
Prehistoric Caucasus
Prehistoric Georgia

Prehistoric Armenia

Paleolithic Europe

Neolithic Europe

Bronze Age Europe

Iron Age Europe

Atlantic fringe
Prehistoric Britain

Prehistoric Ireland

Prehistoric Iberia

Prehistoric Balkans

New World

Pre-Columbian Americas
Prehistoric Southwestern cultural divisions

2nd millennium BCE in North American history

1st millennium BCE in North American history

1st millennium in North American history

Prehistory of Newfoundland and Labrador

Prehistory of the Canadian Maritimes

Prehistory of Quebec

Oceania
Prehistoric Australia

See also

Archaeoastronomy

Archaeology

Archaic Homo sapiens

Band society

Behavioral modernity

History of the family

Holocene

Human evolution

Lineage-bonded society

Paleoanthropology

Pantribal sodalities

Periodization

Prehistoric art
List of Stone Age art

Prehistoric medicine

Prehistoric migration

Prehistoric music

Prehistoric religion

Prehistoric technology

Prehistoric warfare

Three-age system

Younger Dryas

References

^ "Dictionary Entry". Retrieved 8 August 2017.

^ Graslund, Bo. 1987. The birth of prehistoric chronology. Cambridge:Cambridge University Press.

^ a b Fagan, Brian. 2007. World Prehistory: A brief introduction New York: Prentice-Hall, Seventh Edition, Chapter One

^ a b c Renfrew, Colin. 2008. Prehistory: The Making of the Human Mind. New York: Modern Library

^ Fagan, Brian (2017). World prehistory: a brief introduction (Ninth ed.). London: Routledge. p. 8. ISBN 978-1-317-27910-5. OCLC 958480847.

^ Forsythe, Gary (2005). A critical history of early Rome : from prehistory to the first Punic War. Berkeley: University of California Press. p. 12. ISBN 978-0-520-94029-1. OCLC 70728478.

^ Connah, Graham (2007-05-11). "Historical Archaeology in Africa: An Appropriate Concept?". African Archaeological Review. 24 (1–2): 35–40. doi:10.1007/s10437-007-9014-9. ISSN 0263-0338.

^ a b Matthew Daniel Eddy, ed. (2011). Prehistoric Minds: Human Origins as a Cultural Artefact. Royal Society of London.

^ Eddy, Matthew Daniel (2011). "The Line of Reason: Hugh Blair, Spatiality and the Progressive Structure of Language". Notes and Records of the Royal Society. 65: 9–24. doi:10.1098/rsnr.2010.0098.

^ Eddy, Matthew Daniel (2011). "The Prehistoric Mind as a Historical Artefact". Notes and Records of the Royal Society. 65: 1–8. doi:10.1098/rsnr.2010.0097.

^ The Prehistory of Iberia: Debating Early Social Stratification and the State edited by María Cruz Berrocal, Leonardo García Sanjuán, Antonio Gilman. Pg 36.

^ Historical Archaeology: Back from the Edge. Edited by Pedro Paulo A. Funari, Martin Hall, Sian Jones. p. 8.

^ Through the Ages in Palestinian Archaeology: An Introductory Handbook. By Walter E. Ras. p. 49.

^ The Essence of Anthropology 3rd ed. By William A. Haviland, Harald E. L. Prins, Dana Walrath, Bunny McBrid. Pg 83.

^ Race and Human Evolution. By Milford H. Wolpoff. p. 348.

^ Vanishing Voices : The Extinction of the World's Languages. By Daniel Nettle, Suzanne Romaine Merton Professor of English Language University of Oxford. pp. 102–103.

^ Earle, Timothy (1989). "Chiefdoms". Current Anthropology. 30 (1): 84–88. doi:10.1086/203717. JSTOR 2743311.

^ "Songlines: the Indigenous memory code". Radio National. 2016-07-08. Retrieved 2019-02-18.

^ "Hagarqim « Heritage Malta". Archived from the original on 2009-02-03. Retrieved 2009-02-20.

^ "World Museum of Man: Neolithic / Chalcolithic Period". World Museum of Man. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 21 August 2013.

^ Lyras; et al. (2008). "The origin of Homo floresiensis and its relation to evolutionary processes under isolation". Anthropological Science.

^ Figure 3.3 from First Farmers: The Origins of Agricultural Societies by Peter Bellwood, 2004

^ "The Perfect Gift: Prehistoric Massacres. The twin vices of women and cattle in prehistoric Europe". Archived from the original on June 11, 2008.

^ Winn, Shan (1981). Pre-writing in Southeastern Europe: The Sign System of the Vinča Culture ca. 4000 BC. Calgary: Western Publishers.

^ Leonard D. Katz Rigby; S. Stephen Henry Rigby (2000). Evolutionary Origins of Morality: Cross-disciplinary Perspectives. United kingdom: Imprint Academic. p. 158. ISBN 978-0-7190-5612-3.

^ Harris, Susanna (2009). "Smooth and Cool, or Warm and Soft: Investigatingthe Properties of Cloth in Prehistory". North European Symposium for Archaeological Textiles X. Academia.edu. Retrieved 5 September 2013.

^ "Aspects of Life During the Neolithic Period" (PDF). Teachers' Curriculum Institute. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 May 2016. Retrieved 5 September 2013.

^ Gibbs, Kevin T. (2006). "Pierced clay disks and Late Neolithic textile production". Proceedings of the 5th International Congress on the Archaeology of the Ancient Near East. Academia.org. Retrieved 5 September 2013.

^ Green, Jean M (1993). "Unraveling the Enigma of the Bi: The Spindle Whorl as the Model of the Ritual Disk". Asian Perspectives. 32 (1): 105–124. Archived from the original on 2015-02-11.

^ Cook, M (2007). "The clay loom weight, in: Early Neolithic ritual activity, Bronze Age occupation and medieval activity at Pitlethie Road, Leuchars, Fife". Tayside and Fife Archaeological Journal. 13: 1–23.

^ "Serbian site may have hosted first copper makers". ScienceNews. July 17, 2010.

^ Shea, J.J. (2003). "Neanderthals, competition and the origin of modern human behaviour in the Levant". Evolutionary Anthropology. 12: 173–187. doi:10.1002/evan.10101.

^ Toups, M.A.; Kitchen, A.; Light, J.E.; Reed, D. L. (September 2010). "Origin of Clothing Lice Indicates Early Clothing Use by Anatomically Modern Humans in Africa". Molecular Biology and Evolution. 28 (1): 29–32. doi:10.1093/molbev/msq234. PMC 3002236. PMID 20823373.

^ "Mount Toba Eruption – Ancient Humans Unscathed, Study Claims". Retrieved 2008-04-20.

^ Zimmer, Carl (September 21, 2016). "How We Got Here: DNA Points to a Single Migration From Africa". New York Times. Retrieved September 22, 2016.

^ a b This is indicated by the M130 marker in the Y chromosome. "Traces of a Distant Past", by Gary Stix, Scientific American, July 2008, pp. 56–63.

^ Macey, Richard (2007). "Settlers' history rewritten: go back 30,000 years". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 5 July 2014.

^ "Aboriginal people and place". Sydney Barani. 2013. Retrieved 5 July 2014.

^ Sandra Bowdler. "The Pleistocene Pacific". Published in 'Human settlement', in D. Denoon (ed) The Cambridge History of the Pacific Islanders. pp. 41–50. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. University of Western Australia. Archived from the original on 16 February 2008. Retrieved 26 February 2008.

^ Gary Presland, The First Residents of Melbourne's Western Region, (revised edition), Harriland Press, 1997. ISBN 0-646-33150-7. Presland says on p. 1: "There is some evidence to show that people were living in the Maribyrnong River valley, near present day Keilor, about 40,000 years ago."

^ James Trager, The People's Chronology, 1994, ISBN 0-8050-3134-0

^ Gene S. Stuart, "Ice Age Hunters: Artists in Hidden Cages." In Mysteries of the Ancient World, a publication of the National Geographic Society, 1979. pp. 11–18.

^ "Venus of Willendorf". Khan Academy. Retrieved 2019-02-18.

^ Stuart, Gene S. (1979). "Ice Age Hunters: Artists in Hidden Cages". Mysteries of the Ancient World. National Geographic Society. p. 19.

^ Snir, Ainit (2015). "The Origin of Cultivation and Proto-Weeds, Long Before Neolithic Farming". PLOS ONE. 10: e0131422. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0131422. PMC 4511808. PMID 26200895.

^ Stuart, Gene S. (1979). "Ice Age Hunters: Artists in Hidden Cages". Mysteries of the Ancient World. National Geographic Society. pp. 8–10.

^ "Shift from Savannah to Sahara was Gradual", by Kenneth Chang, New York Times, May 9, 2008.

^ Kislev et al. (2006a, b), Lev-Yadun et al. (2006)

^ Kiple, Kenneth F. and Ornelas, Kriemhild Coneè, eds., The Cambridge World History of Food, Cambridge University Press, 2000, p. 83

^ "No-Till: The Quiet Revolution", by David Huggins and John Reganold, Scientific American, July 2008, pp. 70–77.

^ Fagan, Brian M, ed. The Oxford Companion to Archaeology, Oxford University Press, Oxford 1996 ISBN 978-0-521-40216-3 p 363

^ Glassner, Jean-Jacques. The Invention of Cuneiform: Writing In Sumer. Trans.Zainab, Bahrani. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2003. Ebook.

^ Caroline Alexander, "Stonehenge", National Geographic, June 2008.

External links

 Wikiquote has quotations related to: Prehistory

Submerged Landscapes Archaeological Network

The Neanderthal site at Veldwezelt-Hezerwater, Belgium.

North Pacific Prehistory is an academic journal specialising in Northeast Asian and North American archaeology.

Prehistory in Algeria and in Morocco

Early Humans a collection of resources for students from the Courtenay Middle School Library.

v

t

e

Prehistoric technology

Prehistory
Timeline

Outline

Stone Age

Subdivisions

New Stone Age

Technology
history

Glossary

Tools

Farming 
Neolithic Revolution
founder crops

New World crops

Ard / plough

Celt

Digging stick

Domestication

Goad

Irrigation

Secondary products

Sickle

Terracing

Food processing 
Fire

Basket

Cooking
Earth oven

Granaries

Grinding slab

Ground stone

Hearth
Aşıklı Höyük

Qesem cave

Manos

Metate

Mortar and pestle

Pottery

Quern-stone

Storage pit

Hunting

Arrow

Boomerang
throwing stick

Bow and arrow
history

Nets

Spear
Spear-thrower

baton

harpoon

woomera

Schöningen spears

Projectile points 
Arrowhead

Bare Island

Cascade

Clovis

Cresswell

Cumberland

Eden

Folsom

Lamoka

Manis Site

Plano

Transverse arrowhead

Systems 
Game drive system
Buffalo jump

Toolmaking 
Earliest toolmaking
Oldowan

Acheulean

Mousterian

Aurignacian

Clovis culture

Cupstone

Fire hardening

Gravettian culture

Hafting

Hand axe
Grooves

Langdale axe industry

Levallois technique

Lithic core

Lithic reduction
analysis

debitage

flake

Lithic technology

Magdalenian culture

Metallurgy

Microblade technology

Mining

Prepared-core technique

Solutrean industry

Striking platform

Tool stone

Uniface

Yubetsu technique

Other tools 
Adze

Awl
bone

Axe

Bannerstone

Blade
prismatic

Bone tool

Bow drill

Burin

Canoe
Oar

Pesse canoe

Chopper
tool

Cleaver

Denticulate tool

Fire plough

Fire-saw

Hammerstone

Knife

Microlith

Quern-stone

Racloir

Rope

Scraper
side

Stone tool

Tally stick

Weapons

Wheel
illustration

Architecture

Ceremonial 
Göbekli Tepe

Kiva

Standing stones
megalith

row

Stonehenge

Pyramid

Dwellings 
Neolithic architecture

British megalith architecture

Nordic megalith architecture

Burdei

Cave

Cliff dwelling

Dugout

Hut
Quiggly hole

Jacal

Longhouse

Mud brick
Mehrgarh

Neolithic long house

Pit-house

Pueblitos

Pueblo

Rock shelter
Blombos Cave

Abri de la Madeleine

Sibudu Cave

Stone roof

Roundhouse

Stilt house
Alp pile dwellings

Wattle and daub

Water management 
Check dam

Cistern

Flush toilet

Reservoir

Well

Other architecture 
Archaeological features

Broch

Burnt mound
fulacht fiadh

Causewayed enclosure
Tor enclosure

Circular enclosure
Goseck

Cursus

Henge
Thornborough

Oldest surviving buildings

Megalithic architectural elements

Midden

Timber circle

Timber trackway
Sweet Track

Arts and culture

Material goods 
Baskets

Beadwork

Beds

Chalcolithic

Clothing/textiles
timeline

Cosmetics

Glue

Hides
shoes

Ötzi

Jewelry
amber use

Mirrors

Pottery
Cardium

Cord-marked

Grooved ware

Linear

Jōmon

Unstan ware

Sewing needle

Weaving

Wine
Winery

wine press

Prehistoric art 
Art of the Upper Paleolithic

Art of the Middle Paleolithic
Blombos Cave

List of Stone Age art

Bird stone

Bradshaw rock paintings

Cairn

Carved stone balls

Cave paintings
painting

pigment

Cup and ring mark

Geoglyph

Golden hats

Guardian stones

Megalithic art

Petroform

Petroglyph

Petrosomatoglyph

Pictogram

Rock art
Rock cupule

Stone carving

Sculpture

Statue menhir

Stone circle
list

British Isles and Brittany

Venus figurines

Burial 
Burial mounds
Bowl barrow

Round barrow

Mound Builders culture
U.S. sites

Chamber tomb
Cotswold-Severn

Cist
Dartmoor kistvaens

Clava cairn

Court tomb

Cremation

Dolmen
Great dolmen

Funeral pyre

Gallery grave
transepted

wedge-shaped

Grave goods

Jar burial

Long barrow
unchambered

Grønsalen

Megalithic tomb

Mummy

Passage grave

Rectangular dolmen

Ring cairn

Simple dolmen

Stone box grave

Tor cairn

Tumulus

Unchambered long cairn

Other cultural 
Astronomy
sites

lunar calendar

Behavioral modernity

Origin of language
trepanning

Prehistoric medicine

Evolutionary musicology
music archaeology

Prehistoric music
Alligator drum

flutes

Divje Babe flute

gudi

Prehistoric numerals

Origin of religion
Paleolithic religion

Prehistoric religion

Spiritual drug use

Prehistoric warfare

Symbols
symbolism
