This law-related article does not cite its references or sources. You can help Wikipedia by including appropriate citations, which can be found through legal research. Unsourced or poorly sourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2007) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Procedural law, adjective law, in some jurisdictions referred to as remedial law, or rules of court comprises the rules by which a court hears and determines what happens in civil, lawsuit, criminal or administrative proceedings. The rules are designed to ensure a fair and consistent application of due process (in the U.S.) or fundamental justice (in other common law countries) to all cases that come before a court. 

Substantive law, which refers to the actual claim and defense whose validity is tested through the procedures of procedural law, is different from procedural law. 

In the context of procedural law, procedural rights may also refer not exhaustively to rights to information, access to justice, and rights to public participation, with those rights encompassing, general civil and political rights. In environmental law, these procedural Rights have been reflected within the UNECE Convention on "Access to Information, Public Participation in Decision-making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters" known as the Aarhus Convention (1998).

Contents

1 Legal procedure

2 European history and concepts

2.1 "Procedural law" and "substantive law" in various languages

2.2 The substance of "procedural law"/"substantive law" in Europe

3 See also

4 Further reading

5 External links

Legal procedure

Although different legal processes aim to resolve many kinds of legal disputes, the legal procedures share some common features. All legal procedure, for example, is concerned with due process. Absent very special conditions, a court can not impose a penalty - civil or criminal - against an individual who has not received
notice of a lawsuit being brought against them, or who has not received a fair opportunity to present evidence for themselves.

The standardization for the means by which cases are brought, parties are informed, evidence is presented, and facts are determined is intended to maximize the fairness of any proceeding. Nevertheless, strict procedural rules have certain drawbacks. For example, they impose specific time limitations upon the parties that may either hasten or (more frequently) slow down the pace of proceedings. Furthermore, a party who is unfamiliar with procedural rules may run afoul of guidelines that have nothing to do with the merits of the case, and yet the failure to follow these guidelines may severely damage the party's chances. Procedural systems are constantly torn between arguments that judges should have greater discretion in order to avoid the rigidity of the rules, and arguments that judges should have less discretion in order to avoid an outcome based more on the personal preferences of the judge than on the law or the facts.

Legal procedure, in a larger sense, is also designed to effect the best distribution of judicial resources. For example, in most courts of general jurisdiction in the United States, criminal cases are given priority over civil cases, because criminal defendants stand to lose their freedom, and should therefore be accorded the first opportunity to have their case heard.

European history and concepts

"Procedural law" and "substantive law" in various languages

"Procedural law" in contrast to "substantive law" is a concept available in various legal systems and languages. Similar to the English expressions are the Spanish words derecho adjetivo and derecho material or derecho sustantivo, as well as the Portuguese terms for them, direito adjetivo and direito substantivo. Other ideas are behind the German expressions formelles Recht (or Verfahrensrecht) and materielles Recht as well as the French droit formel/droit matériel, the Italian diritto formale/diritto materiale and the Swedish formell rätt/materiell rätt; all of which, taken literally, mean "formal" and "material" law. The same opposition can be found in the Russian legal vocabulary, with материальное право for substantive law and процессуальное право for procedural. Similar to Russian, in Bulgarian "материално право" means substantive law and процесуално право is used for procedural. In Chinese, "procedural law" and "substantive law" are represented by these characters: "程序法" and "实体法".

In Germany, the expressions formelles Recht and materielles Recht were developed in the 19th century, because only during that time was the Roman actio split into procedural and substantive components.

The substance of "procedural law"/"substantive law" in Europe

In the European legal systems the Roman law had been of great influence. In ancient times the Roman civil procedure applied to many countries. One of the main issues of the procedure has been the actio (similar to the English word "act"). In the procedure of the legis actiones the actio included both procedural and substantive elements. Because during this procedure the praetor had granted, or denied, litigation by granting or denying, respectively, an actio. By granting the actio the praetor in the end has created claims. I.e. a procedural act caused substantive claims to exist. Such priority (procedure over substance) is contrary to what we think of the relationship nowadays. But it has not only been an issue of priority and whether the one serves the other. Since the actio had been composed of elements of procedure and substance it was difficult to separate both parts again.

Even the scientific handling of law, which developed during medieval times in the new universities in Italy (in particular in Bologna, Mantua), did not come to a full and clear separation. (The English system of "writs" in the Middle Ages had a similar problem to the Roman tradition with the actio.)

In Germany the unity of procedure and substance in the actio definitely was brought to an end with the codification of the Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch (BGB) which came into force on January 1, 1900. The expression Anspruch (§ 194 of BGB) - meaning "claim" - has been "cleared" from procedural elements. And this was the time for "founding" the terms formelles / materielles Recht. However, after World War II the expression formelles Recht obviously was found to be "contaminated" and to a broad extent has been replaced by Prozessrecht, narrowing the idea behind it to "law of litigation" (thereby excluding e.g. the law of other procedures and the law on competences).

See also

Civil procedure

Criminal procedure

Hearing (law)

Legal technicality

Vyavahara

Further reading

Andreas Kollmann: Begriffs- und Problemgeschichte des Verhältnisses von formellem und materiellem Recht, edition: Duncker & Humblot, Berlin, Schriften zur Rechtsgeschichte no. 68, 1996.

Cardozo, Benjamin N. (1998). The Nature of the Judicial Process. New Haven: Yale University Press.

Frank, Jerome (1985). Law and the Modern Mind. Birmingham, AL: Legal Classics Library.

Levi, Edward H. (1949) An Introduction to Legal Reasoning. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Marshall, Thurgood (2001). Thurgood Marshall: His Speeches, Writings, Arguments, Opinions and Reminiscences. Chicago: Lawrence Hill Books.

Miller, Arthur S. (1985). Politics, Democracy and the Supreme Court: Essays on the Future of Constitutional Theory. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.

Tribe, Laurence (1985). God Save This Honorable Court: How the Choice of Supreme Court Justices Shapes Our History. New York: Random House.

Zelermyer, William (1977). The Legal System in Operation. St. Paul, MN: West Publishing.

Max Planck Institute Luxembourg for Procedural Law

External links

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Legal procedure.

US Federal Court Rules

v

t

e

Law

Core subjects 
Administrative law

Civil law

Constitutional law

Contract

Criminal law

Deed

Equity

Evidence

International law

Law of obligations

Procedure
Civil

Criminal

Property law

Public law

Restitution

Statutory law

Tort

Other subjects 
Agricultural law

Aviation law

Banking law

Bankruptcy

Commercial law

Competition law

Conflict of laws

Construction law

Consumer protection

Corporate law

Cyberlaw

Election law

Energy law

Entertainment law

Environmental law

Family law

Financial law

Financial regulation

Health law

History of the legal profession

History of the American legal profession

Immigration law

Intellectual property

International criminal law

International human rights

International slavery laws

Jurimetrics

Labour

Law of war

Legal archaeology

Legal fiction

Maritime law

Media law

Military law

Probate
Estate

Will and testament

Product liability

Public international law

Space law

Sports law

Tax law

Transport law

Trust law

Women in law

Sources of law 
Charter

Code

Constitution

Custom

Divine right
Divine law

Human rights

Natural law
Natural and legal rights

Case law
Precedent

Law making 
Ballot measure

Codification

Decree
Edict

Executive order

Proclamation

Legislation
Delegated legislation

General executory decree

Regulation

Rulemaking

Promulgation

Repeal

Treaty
Concordat

Statutory law
Statute

Act of Parliament

Act of Congress (US)

Legal systems 
Civil law

Common law

Chinese law

Legal pluralism

Religious law
Canon law

Hindu law

Jain law

Jewish law

Sharia

Roman law

Socialist law

Statutory law

Xeer

Yassa

Legal theory 
Contract theory

Critical legal studies

Comparative law

Feminist

Fundamental theory of canon law

Law and economics

Legal formalism

History

International legal theory

Principle of legality

Rule of law

Sociology

Jurisprudence 
Adjudication

Administration of justice

Criminal justice

Court-martial

Dispute resolution

Fiqh

Lawsuit/Litigation

Legal opinion

Legal remedy

Judge
Justice of the peace

Magistrate

Judgment

Judicial review

Jurisdiction

Jury

Justice

Practice of law
Attorney

Barrister

Counsel

Lawyer

Legal representation

Prosecutor

Solicitor

Question of fact

Question of law

Trial

Trial advocacy

Trier of fact

Verdict

Legal institutions 
Bureaucracy

The bar

The bench

Civil society

Court

Election commission

Executive

Judiciary

Law enforcement

Legal education
Law school

Legislature

Military

Police

Political party

Tribunal

Category

Index

Outline

Portal

Authority control 
GND: 4126493-9

LCCN: sh85107127

NDL: 00571471
