This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Put option" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (November 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

In finance, a put or put option is a stock market instrument which gives the holder (i.e. the purchaser of the put option) the right to sell an asset (the underlying), at a specified price (the strike), by (or at) a specified date (the expiry or maturity) to the writer (i.e. seller) of the put. The purchase of a put option is interpreted as a negative sentiment about the future value of the underlying stock. The term "put" comes from the fact that the owner has the right to "put up for sale" the stock or index.

Put options are most commonly used in the stock market to protect against a fall in the price of a stock below a specified price. If the price of the stock declines below the strike price, the holder of the put has the right, but not the obligation, to sell the asset at the strike price, while the seller of the put has the obligation to purchase the asset at the strike price if the owner uses the right to do so (the holder is said to exercise the option). In this way the buyer of the put will receive at least the strike price specified, even if the asset is currently worthless.

If the strike is K, and at time t the value of the underlying is S(t), then in an American option the buyer can exercise the put for a payout of K-S(t) any time until the option's maturity date T. The put yields a positive return only if the underlying price falls below the strike when the option is exercised. A European option can only be exercised at time T rather than at any time until T, and a Bermudan option can be exercised only on specific dates listed in the terms of the contract. If the option is not exercised by maturity, it expires worthless. (The buyer will not usually exercise the option at an allowable date if the price of the underlying is greater than K.)

The most obvious use of a put option is as a type of insurance. In the protective put strategy, the investor buys enough puts to cover their holdings of the underlying so that if the price of the underlying falls sharply, they can still sell it at the strike price. Another use is for speculation: an investor can take a short position in the underlying stock without trading in it directly.

Puts may also be combined with other derivatives as part of more complex investment strategies, and in particular, may be useful for hedging. Holding a European put option is equivalent to holding the corresponding call option and selling an appropriate forward contract. This equivalence is called "put-call parity".

Contents

1 Instrument models

2 Example of a put option on a stock

2.1 Buying a put

2.2 Writing a put

3 Put option profit/loss chart

4 See also

4.1 Options

5 References

6 External links

Instrument models

The terms for exercising the option's right to sell it differ depending on option style. A European put option allows the holder to exercise the put option for a short period of time right before expiration, while an American put option allows exercise at any time before expiration.

The most widely traded put options are on stocks/equities, but they are traded on many other instruments such as interest rates (see interest rate floor) or commodities.

The put buyer either believes that the underlying asset's price will fall by the exercise date or hopes to protect a long position in it. The advantage of buying a put over short selling the asset is that the option owner's risk of loss is limited to the premium paid for it, whereas the asset short seller's risk of loss is unlimited (its price can rise greatly, in fact, in theory it can rise infinitely, and such a rise is the short seller's loss). The put buyer's prospect (risk) of gain is limited to the option's strike price less the underlying's spot price and the premium/fee paid for it.

The put writer believes that the underlying security's price will rise, not fall. The writer sells the put to collect the premium. The put writer's total potential loss is limited to the put's strike price less the spot and premium already received. Puts can be used also to limit the writer's portfolio risk and may be part of an option spread.

The put buyer/owner is short on the underlying asset of the put, but long on the put option itself. That is, the buyer wants the value of the put option to increase by a decline in the price of the underlying asset below the strike price. The writer (seller) of a put is long on the underlying asset and short on the put option itself. That is, the seller wants the option to become worthless by an increase in the price of the underlying asset above the strike price. Generally, a put option that is purchased is referred to as a long put and a put option that is sold is referred to as a short put.

A naked put, also called an uncovered put, is a put option whose writer (the seller) does not have a position in the underlying stock or other instrument. This strategy is best used by investors who want to accumulate a position in the underlying stock, but only if the price is low enough. If the buyer fails to exercise the options, then the writer keeps the option premium.
If the underlying stock's market price is below the option's strike price when expiration arrives, the option owner (buyer) can exercise the put option, forcing the writer to buy the underlying stock at the strike price. That allows the exerciser (buyer) to profit from the difference between the stock's market price and the option's strike price. But if the stock's market price is above the option's strike price at the end of expiration day, the option expires worthless, and the owner's loss is limited to the premium (fee) paid for it (the writer's profit).

The seller's potential loss on a naked put can be substantial. If the stock falls all the way to zero (bankruptcy), his loss is equal to the strike price (at which he must buy the stock to cover the option) minus the premium received. The potential upside is the premium received when selling the option: if the stock price is above the strike price at expiration, the option seller keeps the premium, and the option expires worthless. During the option's lifetime, if the stock moves lower, the option's premium may increase (depending on how far the stock falls and how much time passes). If it does, it becomes more costly to close the position (repurchase the put, sold earlier), resulting in a loss. If the stock price completely collapses before the put position is closed, the put writer potentially can face catastrophic loss. In order to protect the put buyer from default, the put writer is required to post margin. The put buyer does not need to post margin because the buyer would not exercise the option if it had a negative payoff.

Example of a put option on a stock

Payoff from buying a put.

Payoff from writing a put.

Buying a put

A buyer thinks the price of a stock will decrease. He pays a premium which he will never get back, unless it is sold before it expires. The buyer has the right to sell the stock at the strike price.

Writing a put

The writer receives a premium from the buyer. If the buyer exercises his option, the writer will buy the stock at the strike price. If the buyer does not exercise his option, the writer's profit is the premium.

"Trader A" (Put Buyer) purchases a put contract to sell 100 shares of XYZ Corp. to "Trader B" (Put Writer) for $50 per share. The current price is $50 per share, and Trader A pays a premium of $5 per share. If the price of XYZ stock falls to $40 a share right before expiration, then Trader A can exercise the put by buying 100 shares for $4,000 from the stock market, then selling them to Trader B for $5,000.

Trader A's total earnings S can be calculated at $500. The sale of the 100 shares of stock at a strike price of $50 to Trader B = $5,000 (P). The purchase of 100 shares of stock at $40 = $4,000 (Q). The put option premium paid to Trader B for buying the contract of 100 shares at $5 per share, excluding commissions = $500 (R)). Thus

S = (P − Q) − R = ($5,000 − $4,000) − $500 = $500

If, however, the share price never drops below the strike price (in this case, $50), then Trader A would not exercise the option (because selling a stock to Trader B at $50 would cost Trader A more than that to buy it). Trader A's option would be worthless and he would have lost the whole investment, the fee (premium) for the option contract, $500 ($5 per share, 100 shares per contract). Trader A's total loss is limited to the cost of the put premium plus the sales commission to buy it.

A put option is said to have intrinsic value when the underlying instrument has a spot price (S) below the option's strike price (K). Upon exercise, a put option is valued at K-S if it is "in-the-money", otherwise its value is zero. Prior to exercise, an option has time value apart from its intrinsic value. The following factors reduce the time value of a put option: shortening of the time to expire, decrease in the volatility of the underlying, and increase of interest rates. Option pricing is a central problem of financial mathematics.

Put option profit/loss chart

Purchased put option profit / loss chart.

Trading options involves a constant monitoring of the option value, which is affected by changes in the base asset price, volatility and time decay.
Moreover, the dependence of the put option value to those factors is not linear – which makes the analysis even more complex.
One very useful way to analyze and track the value of an option position is by drawing a Profit / Loss chart that shows how the option value changes with changes in the base asset price and other factors. For example, this Profit / Loss chart shows the profit / loss of a put option position (with $100 strike and maturity of 30 days) purchased at a price of $3.34 (blue graph – the day of the purchase of the option; orange graph – at expiry).

The graph clearly shows the non-linear dependence of the option value to the base asset price.

As time passes, the blue graphs move "downward", until it reaches the orange graph (which is the profit / loss at expiry) – this loss of value by the option is called "time decay".

See also

Call option

CBOE S&P 500 PutWrite Index (PUT)

Married put

Naked put

Options

Credit default option

Interest rate cap and floor

Options on futures

Real option

References

^ "Archived copy". SSRN 1100038. Cite journal requires |journal= (help)

External links

Basic Options Concepts: Put Options at Yahoo! Finance

v

t

e

Derivatives market

Derivative (finance)

Options

Terms 
Credit spread

Debit spread

Exercise

Expiration

Moneyness

Open interest

Pin risk

Risk-free interest rate

Strike price

the Greeks

Volatility

Vanilla options 
American

Bond option

Call

Employee stock option

European

Fixed income

FX

Option styles

Put

Warrants

Exotic options 
Asian

Barrier

Basket

Binary

Chooser

Cliquet

Commodore

Compound

Forward start

Interest rate

Lookback

Mountain range

Rainbow

Swaption

Combinations 
Collar

Covered call

Fence

Iron butterfly

Iron condor

Straddle

Strangle

Protective put

Risk reversal

Spreads 
Back

Bear

Box

Bull

Butterfly

Calendar

Diagonal

Intermarket

Ratio

Vertical

Valuation 
Binomial

Black

Black–Scholes model

Finite difference

Garman–Kohlhagen

Margrabe's formula

Put–call parity

Simulation

Real options valuation

Trinomial

Vanna–Volga pricing

Swaps 
Amortising

Asset

Basis

Conditional variance

Constant maturity

Correlation

Credit default

Currency

Dividend

Equity

Forex

Forward Rate Agreement

Inflation

Interest rate

Overnight indexed

Total return

Variance

Volatility

Year-on-Year Inflation-Indexed

Zero Coupon Inflation-Indexed

Zero Coupon Swap

Forwards

Futures

Contango

Currency future

Dividend future

Forward market

Forward price

Forwards pricing

Forward rate

Futures pricing

Interest rate future

Margin

Normal backwardation

Single-stock futures

Slippage

Stock market index future

Exotic derivatives 
Energy derivative

Freight derivative

Inflation derivative

Property derivative

Weather derivative

Other derivatives 
Collateralized debt obligation (CDO)

Constant proportion portfolio insurance

Contract for difference

Credit-linked note (CLN)

Credit default option

Credit derivative

Equity-linked note (ELN)

Equity derivative

Foreign exchange derivative

Fund derivative

Interest rate derivative

Mortgage-backed security

Power reverse dual-currency note (PRDC)

Market issues 
Consumer debt

Corporate debt

Government debt

Great Recession

Municipal debt

Tax policy
