Recreational fishing at sunset

Recreational fishing, also called sport fishing, is fishing for pleasure or competition. It can be contrasted with commercial fishing, which is fishing for profit, or subsistence fishing, which is fishing for survival.

The most common form of recreational fishing is done with a rod, reel, line, hooks and any one of a wide range of baits. Other devices, commonly referred to as terminal tackle, are also used to affect or complement the presentation of the bait to the targeted fish. Some examples of terminal tackle include weights, floats, and swivels. Lures are frequently used in place of bait. Some hobbyists make handmade tackle themselves, including plastic lures and artificial flies. The practice of catching or attempting to catch fish with a hook is known as angling.

Big-game fishing is conducted from boats to catch large open-water species such as tuna, sharks and marlin. Noodling and trout tickling are also recreational activities.

Contents

1 History

1.1 Development

1.2 Expansion

2 Sport fishing

3 Fishing techniques

4 Fishing tackle

5 Rules and regulations

6 Fish logs

7 Competitions

8 Industry

9 Biological invasions

10 See also

11 Notes

12 References

13 External links

History

Sketch of Juliana Berners, author of the earliest essay on recreational fishing.

The early evolution of fishing as recreation is not clear, but there is anecdotal evidence for fly fishing in Japan as early as the ninth century BCE, and in Europe Claudius Aelianus (175–235 CE) describes fly fishing in his work On the Nature of Animals.

For the early Japanese and Macedonians, however, fly fishing was likely to have been a means of survival, rather than recreation. It is possible that antecedents of recreational fly fishing arrived in England with the Norman conquest of 1066. Although the point in history where fishing could first be said to be recreational is not clear, it is clear that recreational fishing had fully arrived with the publication of The Compleat Angler.

The earliest English essay on recreational fishing was published in 1496, shortly after the invention of the printing press. The authorship of this was attributed to Dame Juliana Berners, the prioress of the Benedictine Sopwell Nunnery. The essay was titled Treatyse of Fysshynge wyth an Angle, and was published in the second Boke of Saint Albans, a treatise on hawking, hunting, and heraldry. These were major interests of the nobility, and the publisher, Wynkyn de Worde, was concerned that the book should be kept from those who were not gentlemen, since their immoderation in angling might "utterly destroy it".

During the 16th century the work was much read, and was reprinted many times. Treatyse includes detailed information on fishing waters, the construction of rods and lines, and the use of natural baits and artificial flies. It also includes modern concerns about conservation and angler etiquette.

The earliest English poetical treatise on Angling by John Dennys, said to have been a fishing companion of Shakespeare, was published in 1613, The Secrets of Angling. Footnotes of the work, written by Dennys' editor, William Lawson, make the first mention of the phrase to 'cast a fly': "The trout gives the most gentlemanly and readiest sport of all, if you fish with an artificial fly, a line twice your rod's length of three hairs' thickness... and if you have learnt the cast of the fly."

In a US context, The Outdoor Industry Association, states that fishing participation has continued its 11-year upward trajectory, adding 300,000 participants and reaching its highest number of participants since 2007. At the same time,the participation rate dipped slightly by 0.1%, bringing the fishing rate to 16.4%. This was due to the increasing population of the United States.

The "Leaky Bucket" illustrates the annual churn of fishing participants, or those people joining/ rejoining the activity and those quitting in a given year. From 2017 to 2018, there was significant churn in fishing participation. While 9.1 million people stopped fishing, 9.4 million started. All of this change led to a fairly high churn rate of 18.5%, but also resulted in a net gain of 300,000 fishing participants.

In 2018 participants spent a collective 883 million days fishing, averaging 17.9 annual fishing days per person. These average outing were done by an average of 2.1% over the past 3 years.

Development

Izaak Walton's Compleat Angler, published in 1653 helped popularize fly fishing as a sport.

Woodcut by Louis Rhead

Recreational fishing took a great leap forward after the English Civil War, where a newly found interest in the activity left its mark on the many books and treatises that were written on the subject at the time. The renowned officer in the Parliamentary army, Robert Venables, published in 1662 The Experienced Angler, or Angling improved, being a general discourse of angling, imparting many of the aptest ways and choicest experiments for the taking of most sorts of fish in pond or river. Another Civil War veteran to enthusiastically take up fishing, was Richard Franck. He was the first to describe salmon fishing in Scotland, and both in that and trout-fishing with artificial fly he was a practical angler. He was the first angler to name the burbot, and commended the salmon of the River Thames.

Compleat Angler was written by Izaak Walton in 1653 (although Walton continued to add to it for a quarter of a century) and described the fishing in the Derbyshire Wye. It was a celebration of the art and spirit of fishing in prose and verse; 6 verses were quoted from John Dennys's earlier work. A second part to the book was added by Walton's friend Charles Cotton. More than 300 editions of The Compleat Angler have been published. The pastoral discourse was enriched with country fishing folklore, songs and poems, recipes and anecdotes, moral meditations, and quotes from classic literature. The central character, Piscator, champions the art of angling, but with an air of tranquility also relishes the pleasures of friendship, verse and song, and good food and drink.

Trading card of the Ustonson company, an early firm specializing in fishing equipment, and holder of a Royal Warrant from the 1760s.

Cotton's additions completed the instruction in fly fishing and advised on the making of artificial flies where he listed sixty five varieties. Charles Kirby designed an improved fishing hook in 1655 that remains relatively unchanged to this day. He went on to invent the Kirby bend, a distinctive hook with an offset point, still commonly used today.

During the 18th century, the fishing industry became commercialized - rods and tackle were sold at the haberdashers store. After the Great Fire of London in 1666, artisans moved to Redditch which became a centre of production of fishing related products from the 1730s. Onesimus Ustonson established his trading shop in 1761, and his establishment remained as a market leader for the next century. He received a Royal Warrant from three successive monarchs starting with King George IV.

Some have credited Onesimus with the invention of the multiplying winch, although he was certainly the first to advertise its sale. Early multiplying reels were wide and had a small diameter, and their gears, made of brass, often wore down after extensive use. His earliest advertisement in the form of a trading card date from 1768 and was entitled To all lovers of angling. A full list of the tackles he sold included artificial flies, and 'the best sort of multiplying brass winches both stop and plain'. The commercialization of the industry came at a time of expanded interest in fishing as a recreational hobby for members of the aristocracy.

Expansion

British fly-fishing continued to develop in the 19th century, with the emergence of fly fishing clubs, along with the appearance of several books on the subject of fly tying and fly fishing techniques. Alfred Ronalds took up the sport of fly fishing, learning the craft on the rivers Trent, Blythe and Dove. On the River Blythe, near what is today Creswell Green, Ronalds constructed a bankside fishing hut designed primarily as an observatory of trout behaviour in the river. From this hut, and elsewhere on his home rivers, Ronalds conducted experiments and formulated the ideas that eventually were published in The Fly-fisher's Entomology in 1836.

The Fly-fisher's Entomology by Alfred Ronalds had a great influence on the development of fly fishing when it was first published in 1836.

He combined his knowledge of fly fishing with his skill as an engraver and printer, to lavish his work with 20 colour plates. It was the first comprehensive work related to the entomology associated with fly fishing and most fly-fishing historians credit Ronalds with setting a literature standard in 1836 that is still followed today. Describing methods, techniques and, most importantly, artificial flies, in a meaningful way for the angler and illustrating them in colour is a method of presentation that can be seen in most fly-fishing literature today.

By the mid to late 19th century, expanding leisure opportunities for the middle and lower classes began to have its effect on fly fishing, which steadily grew in mass appeal. The expansion of the railway network in Britain allowed the less affluent for the first time to take weekend trips to the seaside or to rivers for fishing. Richer hobbyists ventured further abroad. The large rivers of Norway replete with large stocks of salmon began to attract fishers from England in large numbers in the middle of the century - Jones's guide to Norway, and salmon-fisher's pocket companion, published in 1848, was written by Frederic Tolfrey and was a popular guide to the country.

In southern England, dry-fly fishing acquired an elitist reputation as the only acceptable method of fishing the slower, clearer rivers of the south such as the River Test and the other chalk streams concentrated in Hampshire, Surrey, Dorset and Berkshire (see Southern England Chalk Formation for the geological specifics). The weeds found in these rivers tend to grow very close to the surface, and it was felt necessary to develop new techniques that would keep the fly and the line on the surface of the stream. These became the foundation of all later dry-fly developments.

However, there was nothing to prevent the successful employment of wet flies on these chalk streams, as G. E. M. Skues proved with his nymph and wet fly techniques. To the horror of dry-fly purists, Skues later wrote two books, Minor Tactics of the Chalk Stream, and The Way of a Trout with a Fly, which greatly influenced the development of wet fly fishing. In northern England and Scotland, many anglers also favored wet-fly fishing, where the technique was more popular and widely practiced than in southern England. One of Scotland's leading proponents of the wet fly in the early-to-mid 19th century was W.C. Stewart, who published "The Practical Angler" in 1857.

From The Speckled Brook Trout by Louis Rhead (1902)

In the United States, attitudes toward methods of fly fishing were not nearly as rigidly defined, and both dry- and wet-fly fishing were soon adapted to the conditions of the country. Fly anglers there, are thought to be the first anglers to have used artificial lures for bass fishing. After pressing into service the fly patterns and tackle designed for trout and salmon to catch largemouth and smallmouth bass, they began to adapt these patterns into specific bass flies. Fly anglers seeking bass developed the spinner/fly lure and bass popper fly, which are still used today.

In the late 19th century, American anglers, such as Theodore Gordon, in the Catskill Mountains of New York began using fly tackle to fish the region's brook trout-rich streams such as the Beaverkill and Willowemoc Creek. Many of these early American fly anglers also developed new fly patterns and wrote extensively about their sport, increasing the popularity of fly fishing in the region and in the United States as a whole. Albert Bigelow Paine, a New England author, wrote about fly fishing in The Tent Dwellers, a book about a three-week trip he and a friend took to central Nova Scotia in 1908.

Participation in fly fishing peaked in the early 1920s in the eastern states of Maine and Vermont and in the Midwest in the spring creeks of Wisconsin. Along with deep sea fishing, Ernest Hemingway did much to popularize fly fishing through his works of fiction, including The Sun Also Rises.

Big-game fishing started as a sport after the invention of the motorized boat. In 1898, Dr. Charles Frederick Holder, a marine biologist and early conservationist, pioneered this sport and went on to publish many articles and books on the subject noted for their combination of accurate scientific detail with exciting narratives.

One method of growing popularity is kayak fishing. Kayaks are stealthy and allow anglers to reach areas not fishable from land or by conventional boat. In addition, fishing from kayaks is regarded by some as an effort to level the playing field, to a degree, with their quarry and/or to challenge their angling abilities further by bringing an additional level of complexity to their sport.

Sport fishing

Fishing from a dory on Rosario Strait

Fisherman at Lake Merced using a rod

Rock fishing at Shihtiping in Taiwan

Sport fishing methods vary according to the area fished, the species targeted, the personal strategies of the angler, and the resources available. It ranges from the aristocratic art of fly fishing elaborated in Great Britain, to the high-tech methods used to chase marlin and tuna. Sport fishing is usually done with hook, line, rod and reel rather than with nets or other aids.

Among the most common offshore salt water game fish are marlin, tuna, sailfish, shark, and mackerel.

In North America, freshwater fish include trout, bass, pike, catfish, walleye and muskellunge. The smallest fish are called panfish, because they can fit whole in a normal cooking pan. Examples are perch and sunfish (Centrarchidae).

In the past, sport fishers, even if they did not eat their catch, almost always killed them to bring them to shore to be weighed or for preservation as trophies. In order to protect recreational fisheries sport fishermen now often catch and release, and sometimes tag and release, which involves fitting the fish with identity tags, recording vital statistics, and sending a record to a government agency.

Fishing techniques

Main article: Fishing techniques

Recreational fishing techniques include hand gathering, spearfishing, netting, angling and trapping.

Most recreational fishers use a fishing rod with a fishing line and a hook at the end of the line. The rod may be equipped with a reel so the line can be reeled in, and some form of bait or a lure attached to the hook. Fly fishing is a special form of rod fishing in which the reel is attached to the back end of the rod, and heavy line is cast with a complex, repetitive whipping motion to deliver the ultra light artificial fly to its target. Another less common technique is bowfishing using a regular bow or a crossbow. The "arrow" is a modified bolt with barbs at the tip, connected to a fishing line so the fish can be retrieved. Some crossbows are fitted with a reel.

The effective use of fishing techniques often depends on knowledge about the fish and their behaviour including migration, foraging and habitat. Although there is certainly an element of "luck" to fishing, a recent science-based synthesis article reveals that fish capture is a complex function of three interdependent key processes: an individual fish's internal state, its encounter with the gear, and the characteristics of the encountered gear (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/faf.12219/full).

Fishing tackle

Main article: Fishing tackle

Fishing tackle is the equipment used by fishers. Almost any equipment or gear used for fishing can be called fishing tackle. Some examples are hooks, lines, sinkers, floats, rods, reels, baits, lures, spears, nets, gaffs, traps, waders and tackle boxes.

Tackle that is attached to the end of a fishing line is called terminal tackle. This includes hooks, sinkers, floats, leaders, swivels, split rings and wire, snaps, beads, spoons, blades, spinners and clevises to attach spinner blades to fishing lures. The line, hook, bait and other fishing tackle arranged together form a fishing rig.
Fishing tackle can be contrasted with fishing techniques. Fishing tackle refers to the physical equipment that is used when fishing, whereas fishing techniques refers to the ways the tackle is used when fishing.

Rules and regulations

See also: Fishing license

Recreational fishing has conventions, rules, licensing restrictions and laws that limit the way in which fish may be caught. The International Game Fish Association (IGFA) makes and oversees a set of voluntary guidelines. Typically, these prohibit the use of nets and the catching of fish with hooks not in the mouth. Enforceable regulations are put in place by governments to ensure sustainable practice amongst anglers. For example, in the Republic of Ireland, the Central Fisheries Board oversees the implementation of all angling regulations, which include controls on angling lures, baits and number of hooks permissible, as well as licensing requirements and other conservation-based restrictions. Regulations notwithstanding, voluntary catch and release fishing as a means of protecting and sustaining game species has become an increasingly common practice among conservation-minded recreational anglers. Policy makers have largely ignored the recreational fishing sector but there is now a framework for better engagement to ensure that recreational fisheries receive the same attention as commercial fisheries.

In many places they have their rules in an "anglers' handbook". Each year the handbook is updated and new rules such as catch and release, areas to fish and limits on fish can be found.

Fish logs

Some recreational anglers keep a log of the fish they catch, and submit trophy-sized fish to independent record keeping bodies. In the Republic of Ireland, the Irish Specimen Fish Committee verifies and publicizes the capture of trophy fish caught with rod and line by anglers in Ireland, both in freshwater and at sea. The committee also ratifies Irish record rod caught fish. It uses a set of 'fair play' regulations to ensure fish are caught in accordance with accepted angling norms.

Competitions

Main article: Fishing tournament

Recreational fishing competitions (tournaments) are a recent innovation in which fishermen compete for prizes based on the total weight of a given species of fish caught within a predetermined time. This sport evolved from local fishing contests into large competitive circuits, especially in North America. Competitors are most often professional fishermen who are supported by commercial endorsements. Other competitions are based purely on length with mandatory catch and release. Either longest fish or total length is documented with a camera and a mandatory sticker or unique item, a practice used since it is hard to weigh a living fish accurately in a boat.

Sport fishing competitions involve individuals if the fishing occurs from land, and usually teams if conducted from boats, as well as specified times and areas for catching fish. A score is awarded for each fish caught. The points awarded depend on the fish's weight and species. Occasionally a score is divided by the strength of the fishing line used, yielding more points to those who use thinner, weaker line. In tag and release competitions, a flat score is awarded per fish species caught, divided by the line strength. Usually sport fishing competitions award a prize to the boat or team with the most points earned.

In Australia, a self-administered standard for the environmental assessment of tournament fishing has been proposed as an alternative and possible pathway to the ISO 14001 international standard. The standard assesses environmental, social, economic, and public risk factors. Tournament organizers may apply for voluntary certification. In some US states, fishery agencies and competition organizers create their own codes of practice.

Industry

The recreational fishing industry consists of enterprises such as the manufacture and retailing of fishing tackle, the design and building of recreational fishing boats, and the provision of fishing boats for charter and guided fishing trips.

"Pay to fish" enterprises provide anglers with controlled access to stocked lakes, ponds, or canals. These provide fishing opportunities outside of the permitted seasons and quotas applied to public waters. In the United Kingdom, commercial fisheries of this sort charge access fees. In North America, establishments usually charge for the fish caught, by length or by weight, rather than for access to the site although some establishments charge both types of fees.

Recreational fishing is a multibillion-dollar industry. In the United States in 2014, about 11 million recreational saltwater fishers generated $58 billion in sales impacts. By contrast, commercial fishing generated $141 billion in sales impacts.

Biological invasions

Several species, such as Cichla kelberi, C. piquiti, rainbow trout, Wels catfish, and many species in the family Centrarchidae have been introduced in natural or artificial environmental to the sport fishing. Some of these species have caused several impacts in aquatic biota.

See also

Angling

Bass fishing

Big-game fishing

Center pin fishing

Coarse fishing

Fishing knots

Fishing tournament

Environmental effects of fishing

Fishing techniques

List of American fishers

RodMaker Magazine

International Game Fish Association

Notes

^ Herd, Andrew (2003) The Fly. Medlar Press. ISBN 978-1-899600-29-8

^ a b "A Macedonian way of catching fish... They fasten red (crimson red) wool round a hook, and fix on to the wool two feathers which grow under a cock’s wattles, and which in colour are like wax. Their rod is six feet long, and their line is the same length. Then they throw their snare, and the fish, attracted and maddened by the colour, comes straight at it..." McCully, CB (2000) The Language of Fly-Fishing Taylor & Francis, pp. 76_78. ISBN 978-1-57958-275-3.

^ Schullery, Paul Fly fishing History: Beginnings: Aelian Lives

^ Berners, Dame Juliana (1496) A treatyse of fysshynge wyth an Angle (transcription by Risa S. Bear).

^ Cowx, I G (2002) Handbook of Fish Biology and Fisheries, Chapter 17: Recreational fishing. Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 0-632-06482-X

^ Berners, Dame Juliana. (2008). In Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved June 20, 2008, from Encyclopædia Britannica Online

^ C. B. McCully (2000). The Language of Fly-Fishing. Taylor & Francis. p. 41. ISBN 9781579582753.

^ "2019 Special Report on Fishing" (PDF). Outdoor Industry Association. 30 July 2019.

^ a b Andrew N. Herd. "Fly fishing techniques in the fifteenth century". Archived from the original on 2014-06-21.

^ Walton, Izaak. (2008). In Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved June 20, 2008, from Encyclopædia Britannica Online

^ Stan L. Ulanski (2003). The Science of Fly-fishing. University of Virginia Press. p. 4. ISBN 9780813922102.

^ "Welcome To Great Fly Fishing Tips". December 2011.

^ "Fishing Tackle Chapter 3" (PDF).

^ Herd, Andrew Dr (2001). The Fly. Ellesmere, Shropshire: Medlar Press. ISBN 978-1-899600-19-9.

^ Schullery, Paul (1996). American Fly Fishing-A History. Norwalk, CT: The Easton Press. p. 85.

^ a b Andrew N. Herd. "Fly Fishing in the Years 1800 - 1850".

^ a b Waterman, Charles F., Black Bass and the Fly Rod, Stackpole Books (1993)

^ Null, Scott and Mcbride, Joel (2007) Kayak Fishing: The Ultimate Guide.Heliconia Press. ISBN 978-1-896980-28-7

^ Horrox R and Ormrod WM (2006) A social history of England, 1200-1500 Cambridge University Press, pp 278–9. ISBN 978-0-521-78345-3.

^ A fly fishing history

^ Dunn, Bob (2000) Saltwater Game Fishes of the World. Australian Fishing Network.ISBN 978-1865130101

^ Catch And Release Fishing

^ Keegan, William F (1986) The Optimal Foraging Analysis of Horticultural Production American Anthropologist, New Series, Vol. 88, No. 1., pp. 92-107.

^ Fishing On! Media (2013) - "Fishing Tips and Techniques"

^ Fishing in Ireland Central Fisheries Board Website

^ a b Manfredo, Michael J.; Post, John R.; Wilberg, Michael J.; Jensen, Olaf P.; Hilborn, Ray; Cooke, Steven J.; Klefoth, Thomas; Alós, Josep; Hunt, Len M. (2019-03-19). "Opinion: Governing the recreational dimension of global fisheries". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 116 (12): 5209–5213. doi:10.1073/pnas.1902796116. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 6431172. PMID 30890655.

^ Nova Scotia Anglers' Handbook and 2019 Summary of Regulations. Nova Scotia: Government of Nova Scotia. 2019. pp. 4–7.

^ ISFC Trophy Fish Website Irish Specimen Fish Committee

^ Sportfishing in America - American Sportfishing Association

^ A Standard for National Environmental Assessment of Tournament Fishing, 2009, RecFish Australia.

^ NEATFish (An environmental assessment for tournament fishing)

^ Recfish Research Australia. Retrieved 26 June 2010.

^ Angling Retains its Mainstream Appeal and Broad Economic Impact-American Sportfishing Association Archived 2008-05-13 at the Wayback Machine

^ National Marine Fisheries Service (2014) “Fisheries Economics of the United States 2012” pages 6 and 8, NOAA Technical Memorandum NMFS-F/SPO-13.

^ a b Azevedo-Santos, V.M.; Pelicice, F.M.; Lima-Junior, D.P.; Magalhães, A.L.B.; Orsi, M.L.; Vitule, J. R. S. & A.A. Agostinho, 2015. How to avoid fish introductions in Brazil: education and information as alternatives. Natureza & Conservação, in press.

References

The Outdoor Foundation

Aas, Øystein (2008) Global Challenges in Recreational Fisheries John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 9780470698143.

Baron, Frank P (2003) What Fish Don't Want You to Know: An Insider's Guide to Freshwater Fishing. International Marine/Ragged Mountain Press. ISBN 978-0-07-141714-3

Cookea, Steven J and Cowx, Ian G (2006) Contrasting recreational and commercial fishing Biological Conservation, vol 128, issue 1, p. 93-108.

Mason, Paul (2007) Fishing (Recreational Sports). Macmillan Education Australia Pty Ltd . ISBN 978-1-4202-0583-1

Pitcher, Tony J and Hollingworth, Chuck (editors) (2002)Recreation Fisheries: Ecological, Economic and Social Evaluations Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN 978-0-632-06391-8

Schultz, Ken (2004) Ken Schultz's Field Guide to Saltwater Fish John Wiley and Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-44995-9

External links

 Media related to Recreational fishing at Wikimedia Commons

The Outdoor Foundation

University of Washington Freshwater and Marine Image Bank Images of Sport Fishing

SeaWeb (2004) Study In Science Reveals Recreational Fishing Takes Big Bite Of Ocean Catch. ScienceDaily. Retrieved 30 April 2008.

Recreational fishing at Curlie

v

t

e

Fishing equipment and methods

Fishing tackle

Fish hook 
Circle hook

Gaff

Hookset

Sniggle

Fishing line 
Braided

Knots

Monofilament

Multifilament

Power pro

Swivel

Fishing sinker 
Arlesey Bomb

Bombarda

Downrigger

Sandsinker

Fishing rod 
Bamboo fly rod

Fishing reel

Fishing rod tapers

Fly rod building

Fishing bait 
Bait fish

Boilies

Chum

Clonk

Groundbait

Vermicompost

Worm charming

Plastic bait 
Deadsticking

Plastic worm

Fishing lures 
Artificial fly

Heddon

Little Cleo

Mormyshka

Original Floater

Plug

Sabiki

Shyster

Spinnerbait

Spoon lure

Spoonplug

Surface lure

Swimbait

Topwater lure

Zara Spook

Bite indicators 
Fishing float

Pellet waggler

Shortfloating

Quiver tip

Fishing rig 
Carolina rig

Chod rig

Hair rig

Texas rig

Apparel 
Creel

Diving mask

Hip boot

Personal flotation device

Snorkel

Waders

Wetsuit

Other 
Fish stringer

Tackle box

Fishing techniques

Gathering 
Abalone

Ama divers

Clam digging

Flounder tramping

Gathering seafood by hand

Noodling

Pearl hunting

Scallop aquaculture

Trout binning

Trout tickling

Spears 
Bowfishing

Gigging

Harpoon

Hawaiian sling

Polespear

Spearfishing

Speargun

Trident

Fishing lines 
Dropline

Drum lines

Handline fishing

Jiggerpole

Jigging

Jug fishing

Longline fishing

Spin fishing

Trolling

Trotline

Fishing nets 
Cast net

Cheena vala

Drift net

Ghost nets

Gill net

Glass floats

Hand net

Ice jigger

Lampara net

Lampuki net

Lave net

Lift net

Salambaw

Seine net

Surrounding net

Tangle net

Trawl net

Turtle excluder device

Fish traps 
Almadraba

Corf

Crab trap

Double-Heart of Stacked Stones

Eel buck

Fish wheel

Fishing basket

Fishing weir

Lobster trap

Putcher fishing

Trabucco

Other 
Basnig

Blast fishing

Cormorant fishing

Cyanide fishing

Dredging

Electrofishing

Electric pulse fishing

Fish aggregating device

Fish toxins

Fishfinder

Fishing light attractor

Flossing

Ice fishing

Kite fishing

Muro-ami

Otter fishing

Pa-aling

Payaos

Shrimp baiting

Snagging

v

t

e

Angling topics

Angling and game fishing

Angling 
Boat fishing

Trolling

Casting

Spey casting

Reach cast

Surf fishing

Rock fishing

Bank fishing

Jet ski fishing

Kayak fishing

Centerpin fishing

Coarse fish

Rough fish

Bottom fishing

Tackle

Techniques

Tournaments

Traditional fishing boats

Angling personalities

Television series

Confédération Internationale de la Pêche Sportive

Game fishing 
Big-game fishing

Land-based game fishing

Salmon run

International Game Fish Association

Sport fish 
Bass

Carp

Fly target species

Mahi-mahi

Marlin

Porgie (bream)

Shad

Smelt whiting

Striped bass

Swordfish

Walleye

The catch 
Bag limits

Catch and release

Ikejime

Minimum landing size

Panfish

Priest (tool)

Tag and release

Catch records 
Europe

UK

Fly fishing

Fly fishing 
Fly fishing tackle

Bamboo fly rod

Fly rod building

Fly casting

Fly Casting Analyzer

Furled leader

Spey casting

Reach cast

Tenkara fishing

Float tube

Trout bum

Fly waters

Bibliography of fly fishing

Artificial flies 
Fly lure

Fly tying

Adams

Amadou

Alexandra

Clouser Deep Minnow

Crazy Charlie

Cul De Canard

Dave's Hopper

Diawl bach

Egg sucking leech

Elk Hair Caddis

Flesh Fly

Grey Ghost Streamer

Hare's Ear

Klinkhammer

Lefty's Deceiver

Muddler Minnow

Parks' Salmonfly

Partridge and Orange

Pheasant Tail Nymph

Red Tag

Royal Coachman

Royal Wulff

Sakasa Kebari

Trolling tandem streamer fly

Tube fly

Woolly Worm

Woolly Bugger

Organizations 
American Museum of Fly Fishing

Catskill Fly Fishing Center and Museum

Fly Fishers International

Trout Unlimited

Literature 
Blacker's Art of Fly Making

A Book on Angling

A Concise Treatise on the Art of Angling

Dry-Fly Fishing in Theory and Practice

Favorite Flies and Their Histories

Floating Flies and How to Dress Them

The Fly-fisher's Entomology

Fly Fishing

A History of Fly Fishing for Trout

Minor Tactics of the Chalk Stream

Pseudonyms of notable angling authors

The American Angler's Book

The Salmon Fly

The Way of a Trout with the Fly

v

t

e

Animal rights

Topics (overviews, concepts, issues, cases)

Overviews 
Animal rights movement

Animal rights by country or territory

Anarchism and animal rights

Animal rights and punk subculture

Animal rights and the Holocaust

Animal rights in Jainism, Hinduism, and Buddhism

Christianity and animal rights

Moral status of animals in the ancient world

Timeline of animal welfare and rights

Concepts 
Abolitionism

Ahimsa

Animal cognition

Animal consciousness

Animal ethics

Animal law

Animal protectionism

Animal welfare

Animal-free agriculture

Anthrozoology

Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness

Carnism

Ethics of eating meat

Ethology

Meat paradox

Nonviolence

Open rescue

Opposition to hunting

Personism

Sentientism

Sentiocentrism

Speciesism

Veganism

Vegaphobia

Vegetarianism

Issues

Animal agriculture 
Animal industrial complex

Animal product

Battery cage

Bile bear

Chick culling

Concentrated animal feeding operation

Fish farming

Fur farming

Fur trade

Insect farming

Intensive animal farming

Intensive pig farming

Livestock

Poultry farming

Slaughterhouse

Wildlife farming

Animal testing 
Animal testing on non-human primates

Animal testing regulations

Covance

Great ape research ban

Green Scare

Huntingdon Life Sciences

Model organism

Nafovanny

Operation Backfire

Animal welfare 
Animal euthanasia

Cruelty to animals

Pain in animals

Pain in amphibians

Pain in cephalopods

Pain in crustaceans

Pain in fish

Pain in invertebrates

Pain and suffering in laboratory animals

Welfare of farmed insects

Fishing 
Commercial fishing

Fishing bait

Recreational fishing

Wild animals 
Culling wildlife

Hunting

International primate trade

Ivory trade

Predation problem

Wild animal suffering

Wildlife management

Other 
Abandoned pets

Animal sacrifice

Animals in sport

Live food

Cases 
Brown Dog affair

Cambridge University primates

McLibel case

Pit of despair

Silver Spring monkeys

University of California, Riverside 1985 laboratory raid

Unnecessary Fuss

Advocates (academics, writers, activists)

Academics

and writers

Contemporary 
Carol J. Adams

Kristin Andrews

Tom Beauchamp

Marc Bekoff

Steven Best

Paola Cavalieri

Stephen R. L. Clark

Alasdair Cochrane

J. M. Coetzee

Alice Crary

David DeGrazia

Sue Donaldson

Josephine Donovan

Lawrence Finsen

Gary L. Francione

Robert Garner

John Hadley

Oscar Horta

Melanie Joy

Hilda Kean

Will Kymlicka

Andrew Linzey

Clair Linzey

Dan Lyons

Martha Nussbaum

David Pearce

Siobhan O'Sullivan

Clare Palmer

Bernard Rollin

Mark Rowlands

Richard D. Ryder

Peter Singer

Steve F. Sapontzis

Jeff Sebo

Gary Steiner

Cass Sunstein

David J. Wolfson

Corey Lee Wrenn

Historical 
Mona Caird

Priscilla Cohn

Henry Crowe

Herman Daggett

Richard Dean

Wilhelm Dietler

William Hamilton Drummond

Edward Payson Evans

Arthur Helps

John Hildrop

John Lawrence

Charles R. Magel

Mary Midgley

J. Howard Moore

José Ferrater Mora

Edward Nicholson

Humphrey Primatt

Tom Regan

Francis H. Rowley

Henry Stephens Salt

Arthur Schopenhauer

Laurids Smith

Adam Gottlieb Weigen

Jon Wynne-Tyson

Activists

Contemporary 
James Aspey

Greg Avery

Matt Ball

Martin Balluch

Carole Baskin

Barbi Twins

Brigitte Bardot

Bob Barker

Gene Baur

Yves Bonnardel

Rod Coronado

Karen Davis

Chris DeRose

John Feldmann

Bruce Friedrich

Juliet Gellatley

Tal Gilboa

Antoine Goetschel

Jordan Halliday

Ronnie Lee

Evanna Lynch

Bill Maher

Keith Mann

Jim Mason

Dan Mathews

Jo-Anne McArthur

Luísa Mell

Ingrid Newkirk

Heather Nicholson

Jack Norris

David Olivier

Alex Pacheco

Craig Rosebraugh

Nathan Runkle

Jasmin Singer

Kim Stallwood

Marianne Thieme

Darren Thurston

Louise Wallis

Gary Yourofsky

Historical 
Cleveland Amory

Henry B. Amos

Ernest Bell

Frances Power Cobbe

Alice Drakoules

Robert Enke

Lewis Gompertz

James Granger

Barry Horne

C. W. Hume

Marie Huot

Lizzy Lind af Hageby

Jill Phipps

Catherine Smithies

Thomas Bywater Smithies

Henry Spira

Andrew Tyler

Movement (groups, parties)

Groups

Contemporary 
Animal Aid

Animal Ethics

Animal Justice Project

Animal Legal Defense Fund

Animal Liberation Front

Animal Politics Foundation

Anonymous for the Voiceless

Centre for Animals and Social Justice

Chinese Animal Protection Network

Cruelty Free International

Direct Action Everywhere

Equanimal

Farm Animal Rights Movement

Great Ape Project

Hunt Saboteurs Association

In Defense of Animals

Korea Animal Rights Advocates

L214

Last Chance for Animals

Mercy for Animals

New England Anti-Vivisection Society

Oxford Centre for Animal Ethics

People for Animals

People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals

Sentience Politics

Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals

United Poultry Concerns

UPF-Centre for Animal Ethics

Historical 
Bands of Mercy

Humanitarian League (1891–1919)

Oxford Group

Parties 
Animal Justice Party (Australia)

Animal Politics EU (Europe)

Animal Protection Party of Canada (Canada)

Animal Welfare Party (UK)

Animal Justice Party of Finland (Finland)

Animalist Party Against Mistreatment of Animals (Spain)

DierAnimal (Belgium)

Human Environment Animal Protection (Germany)

Italian Animalist Party (Italy)

Party for the Animals (Netherlands)

People Animals Nature (Portugal)

V-Partei³ (Germany)

Media (books, films, periodicals, albums)

Books 
Animals' Rights (1892)

The Universal Kinship (1906)

Animals, Men and Morals (1971)

Animal Liberation (1975)

The Case for Animal Rights (1983)

The Lives of Animals (1999)

Striking at the Roots (2008)

An American Trilogy (2009)

An Introduction to Animals and Political Theory (2010)

Animal Rights Without Liberation (2012)

Political Animals and Animal Politics (2014)

Animal (De)liberation (2016)

Sentientist Politics (2019)

Films 
The Animals Film (1981)

A Cow at My Table (1998)

Meet Your Meat (2002)

Peaceable Kingdom (2004)

Earthlings (2005)

Behind the Mask (2006)

Your Mommy Kills Animals (2007)

The Cove (2009)

Forks Over Knives (2011)

Vegucated (2011)

Speciesism: The Movie (2013)

The Ghosts in Our Machine (2013)

Dominion (2018)

Periodicals

Journals 
Between the Species

Cahiers antispécistes

Journal of Animal Ethics

Relations. Beyond Anthropocentrism

Magazines 
Arkangel

Bite Back

Muutoksen kevät

No Compromise

Satya

Albums 
Animal Liberation (1987)

Tame Yourself (1991)

Manifesto (2008)

Salvation of Innocents (2014)

Onward to Freedom (2014)

 Category ( 213 )
