"A register is the "height" or range of a note, set of pitches or pitch classes, melody, part, instrument, or group of instruments. A higher register indicates higher pitch. 

Example 1: Violins are in a higher register than cellos.

In woodwind and brass instruments, the word register usually distinguishes pitch ranges produced using different normal modes of the air column, with higher registers produced by overblowing. Often the timbres of different woodwind instrument registers tend to be markedly different.

Example 2: The Western concert flute plays approximately three and a half octaves and generally has three complete registers and one partial register. The musical note C4 (corresponding to middle C on the piano) would be in that instrument's first register, whereas C5 (one octave higher) would be in its second register.

However, on the clarinet the notes from (written) G4 or A4 to B♭4 sometimes are regarded as a separate "throat register", even though both they and the notes from F♯4 down are produced using the instrument's lowest normal mode; the timbre of the throat notes differs, and the throat register's fingerings also are distinctive, using special keys and not the standard tone holes used for other notes.

The register in which an instrument plays, or in which a part is written, affects the quality of sound or timbre. Register is also used structurally in musical form, with the climax of a piece usually being in the highest register of that piece. Often, serial and other pieces will use fixed register, allowing a pitch class to be expressed through only one pitch.

Main article: Vocal register

A "register" of the human voice is a series of tones of like quality originating through operation of the larynx. The constituent tones result from similar patterns of vibration in the vocal folds, which can generate several different such patterns, each resulting in characteristic sounds within a particular range of pitches. The term has wide application and can refer to any of several aspects of the human voice, including the following:

A particular segment of the vocal range;

A resonance area such as chest voice or head voice;

A phonatory process;

A certain vocal timbre; or

A region of the voice set off by vocal breaks.

Speech pathologists and many vocal pedagogues recognize four vocal registers: the vocal fry, modal, falsetto, and whistle. To delineate these registers, pathologists specify vibratory pattern of the vocal folds, sequential pitches, and type of sound.

See also

Ambitus

Chest register

Head register

Organ stop and organ registration

Tessitura

Vocal registration

References

^ a b Large, John (February–March 1972). "Towards an Integrated Physiologic-Acoustic Theory of Vocal Registers". The NATS Bulletin. 28: 30–35.

^ a b McKinney, James (1994). The Diagnosis and Correction of Vocal Faults. Genovex Music Group. ISBN 978-1-56593-940-0.

Further reading

"Hints on Singing". Manuel Garcia. New York: Joseph Patelson Music House (1894)

"Singing the Mechanism and the Technic" by William Vennard (1967)

v

t

e

Musical range or compass and register

Vocal register 
Whistle

Falsetto

Modal

Vocal fry

Voice type 
Boy soprano

Soprano
Coloratura

Soubrette

 Lyric

Spinto

 Dramatic

Soprano sfogato

Mezzo-soprano

Contralto (Alto)

Castrato

Countertenor
Sopranist

Tenor
Haute-contre

Tenore contraltino

Tenore di grazia

Baritenor

Baritone

Bass-baritone

Bass
Basso profondo

Sound 
Bass

Sub-bass

Treble

Related articles 
Chest voice

Clef

Extension

Head voice

Passaggio

Pedal tone

Organ registration

Tessitura

Timbre

Vocal range

Vocal weight
