"Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)

Part of The Great Eastern Crisis

The Battle of Shipka Pass in August 1877

Date 24 April 1877 – 3 March 1878 (10 months, 1 week, 2 days)

Location Balkans, Caucasus

Result 
Russian coalition victory

Official recognition of de facto and de jure independence of the Balkan states.

Treaty of San Stefano

Treaty of Berlin

Territorial

changes 
Reestablishment of the Bulgarian state

De jure independence of Romania, Serbia and Montenegro from the Ottoman Empire

Kars and Batum Oblasts become part of the Russian Empire, Britain received Cyprus as a colonial possession, Bosnia and Herzegovina was occupied by Austria-Hungary

Belligerents

 Russia

 Romania

 Serbia

 Montenegro

 Bulgarian Legion

 Ottoman Empire

 Khedivate of Egypt

Chechen and Dagestani insurgents

Abkhazian insurgents

Polish Legion

Commanders and leaders

 Alexander II

 GD. Nicholas Nikolaevich

 GD. Michael Nikolaevich

 Dmitry Milyutin

 Iosif Gurko

 Mikhail Loris-Melikov

 Grigol Dadiani

 Alexander Alexandrovich

 Pyotr Vannovsky

 Mikhail Dragomirov

 Mikhail Skobelev

 Ivan Lazarev

 Eduard Totleben

 Carol I

 Nicholas I

 Milan I

 Kosta Protić

 Abdul Hamid II

 Ibrahim Edhem Pasha

 Ahmed Hamdi Pasha

 Kurt İsmail Pasha

 Ahmed Pasha

 Osman Pasha

 Mehmed Şakir Pasha

 Suleiman Pasha

 Hüseyin Pasha

 Hobart Pasha

 Mehmed Pasha

 Abdülkerim Pasha

 Ahmed Eyüb Pasha

 Deli Fuad Pasha

 Mehmed Riza Pasha

Strength

Russian Empire:

Initial: 185,000 in the Army of the Danube, 75,000 in the Caucasian Army

Total: 260,000 in four corps

Ottoman Empire:

Initial: 70,000 in the Caucasus

Total: 281,000

Casualties and losses

Russian Empire
15,567–34,742 killed

81,166 died of disease

56,652 wounded

1,713 died from wounds

Romania
4,302 killed and missing

3,316 wounded

19,904 sick

Bulgaria
2,456 killed and wounded

Several thousand total military deaths (mostly disease)

Serbia and Montenegro
2,400 dead and wounded

~30,000 killed

60,000–90,000 died from wounds and diseases

Tens of thousands captured

v

t

e

Russo-Turkish War

of 1877–78

Kızıl Tepe

Simnitza

Svistov

Nikopol

Stara Zagora

Plevna

1st Shipka Pass

2nd Shipka Pass

Lovcha

3rd Shipka Pass

Gorni-Dubnik

Erzurum

Kars

Tashkessen

Sofia

4th Shipka Pass

Plovdiv

Harmanli

v

t

e

Russo-Ottoman Wars

1568–70

1676–81

1686–1700

1710–11

1735–39

1768–74

1787–92

1806–12

1828–29

1853–56

1877–78

1914–18

Russo-Crimean Wars

The Russo-Turkish War of 1877–1878 (Turkish: 93 Harbi, lit. 'War of ’93', named for the year 1293 in the Islamic calendar; Bulgarian: Руско–турска Освободителна война, romanized: Rusko-turska Osvoboditelna vojna, "Russian–Turkish Liberation war") was a conflict between the Ottoman Empire and the Eastern Orthodox coalition led by the Russian Empire and composed of Bulgaria, Romania, Serbia, and Montenegro. Fought in the Balkans and in the Caucasus, it originated in emerging 19th-century Balkan nationalism. Additional factors included Russian goals of recovering territorial losses endured during the Crimean War of 1853–56, re-establishing itself in the Black Sea and supporting the political movement attempting to free Balkan nations from the Ottoman Empire.

The Russian-led coalition won the war, pushing the Turks back all the way to the gates of Constantinople but for the timely intervention of the western European great powers.

As a result, Russia succeeded in claiming provinces in the Caucasus, namely Kars and Batum, and also annexed the Budjak region. The principalities of Romania, Serbia, and Montenegro, each of which had had de facto sovereignty for some time, formally proclaimed independence from the Ottoman Empire. After almost five centuries of Ottoman domination (1396–1878), a Bulgarian state re-emerged: the Principality of Bulgaria, covering the land between the Danube River and the Balkan Mountains (except Northern Dobrudja which was given to Romania), as well as the region of Sofia, which became the new state's capital. The Congress of Berlin in 1878 also allowed Austria-Hungary to occupy Bosnia and Herzegovina and Great Britain to take over Cyprus.

The initial Treaty of San Stefano, signed on 3 March 1878, is today celebrated on Liberation Day in Bulgaria, although the occasion somewhat fell out of favour during the years of Communist rule.

Contents

1 Conflict pre-history

1.1 Treatment of Christians in the Ottoman Empire

1.1.1 Crisis in Lebanon, 1860

1.1.2 The revolt in Crete, 1866–1869

1.2 Changing balance of power in Europe

1.2.1 The New European Concert

1.2.2 Russia after the Crimean War

2 Balkan crisis of 1875–1876

2.1 Albanian revolts

2.2 Balkan uprisings

2.2.1 Herzegovina Uprising

2.2.2 Bulgarian Uprising

2.3 International reaction to atrocities in Bulgaria

2.4 Serbo-Turkish War and diplomatic maneuvering

3 Course of the war

3.1 Opening manoeuvres

3.2 Balkan theatre

3.3 Caucasian theatre

3.4 Kurdish uprising

4 Civilian government in Bulgaria during the war

5 Aftermath

5.1 Intervention by the Great Powers

5.2 Effects on Bulgaria's Muslim and Christian populations

5.3 Effects on Bulgaria's Jewish population

5.4 Internationalization of the Armenian Question

6 Atrocities and ethnic cleansing

6.1 Against Turks

6.2 Against Bulgarians

7 Lasting effects

7.1 International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement

8 In popular culture

9 See also

10 Notes

11 References

12 Bibliography

13 Further reading

14 External links

14.1 Video links

Conflict pre-history

Treatment of Christians in the Ottoman Empire

Article 9 of the 1856 Paris Peace Treaty, concluded at the end of the Crimean War, obliged the Ottoman Empire to grant Christians equal rights with Muslims. Before the treaty was signed, the Ottoman government issued an edict, the Edict of Gülhane, which proclaimed the principle of the equality of Muslims and non-Muslims, and produced some specific reforms to this end. For example, the jizya tax was abolished and non-Muslims were allowed to join the army.

However, some key aspects of dhimmi status were retained, including that the testimony of Christians against Muslims was not accepted in courts, which granted Muslims effective immunity for offenses conducted against Christians. Although local-level relations between communities were often good, this practice encouraged exploitation. Abuses were at their worst in regions with a predominantly Christian population, where local authorities often openly supported abuse as a means to keep Christians subjugated.

Crisis in Lebanon, 1860

Main article: 1860 Mount Lebanon civil war

In 1858, the Maronite peasants, stirred by the clergy, revolted against their Druze feudal overlords and established a peasant republic. In southern Lebanon, where Maronite peasants worked for Druze overlords, Druze peasants sided with their overlords against the Maronites, transforming the conflict into a civil war. Although both sides suffered, about 10,000 Maronites were massacred at the hands of the Druze.

Under the threat of European intervention, Ottoman authorities restored order. Nevertheless, French and British intervention followed. Under further European pressure, the Sultan agreed to appoint a Christian governor in Lebanon, whose candidacy was to be submitted by the Sultan and approved by the European powers.

On May 27, 1860 a group of Maronites raided a Druze village. Massacres and reprisal massacres followed, not only in the Lebanon but also in Syria. In the end, between 7,000 and 12,000 people of all religions had been killed, and over 300 villages, 500 churches, 40 monasteries, and 30 schools were destroyed. Christian attacks on Muslims in Beirut stirred the Muslim population of Damascus to attack the Christian minority with between 5,000 and 25,000 of the latter being killed, including the American and Dutch consuls, giving the event an international dimension.

Ottoman foreign minister Mehmed Fuad Pasha came to Syria and solved the problems by seeking out and executing the culprits, including the governor and other officials. Order was restored, and preparations made to give Lebanon new autonomy to avoid European intervention. Nevertheless, in September 1860 France sent a fleet, and Britain joined to prevent a unilateral intervention that could help increase French influence in the area at Britain's expense.

The revolt in Crete, 1866–1869

The Moni Arkadiou monastery

The Cretan Revolt, which began in 1866, resulted from the failure of the Ottoman Empire to apply reforms for improving the life of the population and the Cretans' desire for enosis — union with Greece. The insurgents gained control over the whole island, except for five fortified cities where the Muslims took refuge. The Greek press claimed that Muslims had massacred Greeks and the word was spread throughout Europe. Thousands of Greek volunteers were mobilized and sent to the island.

The siege of Moni Arkadiou monastery became particularly well known. In November 1866, about 250 Cretan Greek combatants and around 600 women and children were besieged by about 23,000 mainly Cretan Muslims aided by Ottoman troops, and this became widely known in Europe. After a bloody battle with a large number of casualties on both sides, the Cretan Greeks finally surrendered when their ammunition ran out but were killed upon surrender.

By early 1869, the insurrection was suppressed, but the Porte offered some concessions, introducing island self-rule and increasing Christian rights on the island. Although the Cretan crisis ended better for the Ottomans than almost any other diplomatic confrontation of the century, the insurrection, and especially the brutality with which it was suppressed, led to greater public attention in Europe to the oppression of Christians in the Ottoman Empire.

Small as the amount of attention is which can be given by the people of England to the affairs of Turkey ... enough was transpiring from time to time to produce a vague but a settled and general impression that the Sultans were not fulfilling the "solemn promises" they had made to Europe; that the vices of the Turkish government were ineradicable; and that whenever another crisis might arise affecting the "independence" of the Ottoman Empire, it would be wholly impossible to afford to it again the support we had afforded in the Crimean war.

Changing balance of power in Europe

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (March 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Ottoman Empire in 1862

Although on the winning side in the Crimean War, the Ottoman Empire continued to decline in power and prestige. The financial strain on the treasury forced the Ottoman government to take a series of foreign loans at such steep interest rates that, despite all the fiscal reforms that followed, pushed it into unpayable debts and economic difficulties. This was further aggravated by the need to accommodate more than 600,000 Muslim Circassians, expelled by the Russians from the Caucasus, to the Black Sea ports of north Anatolia and the Balkan ports of Constanţa and Varna, which cost a great deal in money and in civil disorder to the Ottoman authorities.

The New European Concert

The Concert of Europe established in 1814 was shaken in 1859 when France and Austria fought over Italy. It came apart completely as a result of the wars of German Unification, when the Kingdom of Prussia, led by Chancellor Otto von Bismarck, defeated Austria in 1866 and France in 1870, replacing Austria-Hungary as the dominant power in Central Europe. Britain, diverted by the Irish question and adverse to warfare, chose not to intervene again to restore the European balance. Bismarck did not wish the breakup of the Ottoman Empire to create rivalries that might lead to war, so he took up the Tsar's earlier suggestion that arrangements be made in case the Ottoman Empire fell apart, creating the Three Emperors' League with Austria and Russia to keep France isolated on the continent.

France responded by supporting self-determination movements, particularly if they concerned the three emperors and the Sultan. Thus revolts in Poland against Russia and national aspirations in the Balkans were encouraged by France. Russia worked to regain its right to maintain a fleet on the Black Sea and vied with the French in gaining influence in the Balkans by using the new Pan-Slavic idea that all Slavs should be united under Russian leadership. This could be done only by destroying the two empires where most non-Russian Slavs lived, the Habsburg and the Ottoman Empires. The ambitions and the rivalries of the Russians and French in the Balkans surfaced in Serbia, which was experiencing its own national revival and had ambitions that partly conflicted with those of the great powers.

Russia after the Crimean War

Alexander Gorchakov

Russia ended the Crimean War with minimal territorial losses, but was forced to destroy its Black Sea Fleet and Sevastopol fortifications. Russian international prestige was damaged, and for many years revenge for the Crimean War became the main goal of Russian foreign policy. This was not easy though — the Paris Peace Treaty included guarantees of Ottoman territorial integrity by Great Britain, France and Austria; only Prussia remained friendly to Russia.

The newly appointed Russian chancellor, Alexander Gorchakov depended upon alliance with Prussia and its chancellor Bismarck. Russia consistently supported Prussia in her wars with Denmark (1864), Austria (1866) and France (1870). In March 1871, using the crushing French defeat and the support of a grateful Germany, Russia achieved international recognition of its earlier denouncement of Article 11 of the Paris Peace Treaty, thus enabling it to revive the Black Sea Fleet.

Other clauses of the Paris Peace Treaty, however, remained in force, specifically Article 8 with guarantees of Ottoman territorial integrity by Great Britain, France and Austria. Therefore, Russia was extremely cautious in its relations with the Ottoman Empire, coordinating all its actions with other European powers. A Russian war with Turkey would require at least the tacit support of all other Great Powers, and Russian diplomacy was waiting for a convenient moment.

Balkan crisis of 1875–1876

The state of Ottoman administration in the Balkans continued to deteriorate throughout the 19th century, with the central government occasionally losing control over whole provinces. Reforms imposed by European powers did little to improve the conditions of the Christian population, while managing to dissatisfy a sizable portion of the Muslim population. Bosnia and Herzegovina suffered at least two waves of rebellion by the local Muslim population, the most recent in 1850.

Austria consolidated after the turmoil of the first half of the century and sought to reinvigorate its longstanding policy of expansion at the expense of the Ottoman Empire. Meanwhile, the nominally autonomous, de facto independent principalities of Serbia and Montenegro also sought to expand into regions inhabited by their compatriots. Nationalist and irredentist sentiments were strong and were encouraged by Russia and her agents. At the same time, a severe drought in Anatolia in 1873 and flooding in 1874 caused famine and widespread discontent in the heart of the Empire. The agricultural shortages precluded the collection of necessary taxes, which forced the Ottoman government to declare bankruptcy in October, 1875 and increase taxes on outlying provinces including the Balkans.

Albanian revolts

Franklin Parker states that the Albanian highlanders resented new taxes and conscripton, and fought against the Ottomans in the war.

Balkan uprisings

Herzegovina Uprising

Main article: Herzegovina Uprising (1875–78)

An uprising against Ottoman rule began in Herzegovina in July 1875. By August almost all of Herzegovina had been seized and the revolt had spread into Bosnia. Supported by nationalist volunteers from Serbia and Montenegro, the uprising continued as the Ottomans committed more and more troops to suppress it.

Bulgarian Uprising

Main article: April Uprising

Bashi-bazouks' atrocities in Bulgaria.

The revolt of Bosnia and Herzegovina spurred Bucharest-based Bulgarian revolutionaries into action. In 1875, a Bulgarian uprising was hastily prepared to take advantage of Ottoman preoccupation, but it fizzled before it started. In the spring of 1876, another uprising erupted in the south-central Bulgarian lands despite the fact that there were numerous regular Turkish troops in those areas.

A special Turkish military committee was established to quell the uprising. Regular troops (Nisam) and irregular ones (Redif or Bashi-bazouk) were directed to fight the Bulgarians (May 11 – June 9, 1876). The irregulars were mostly drawn from the Muslim inhabitants of the Bulgarian regions, many of whom were Circassian Islamic population which migrated from the Caucasus or Crimean Tatars who were expelled during the Crimean War and even Islamized Bulgarians. The Turkish army suppressed the revolt, massacring up to 30,000 people in the process. Five thousand out of the seven thousand villagers of Batak were put to death. Both Batak and Perushtitsa, where the majority of the population was also massacred, participated in the rebellion. Many of the perpetrators of those massacres were later decorated by the Ottoman high command. Modern historians have estimated the number of killed Bulgarian population is between 30,000 and 100,000. The Turkish military carried on horribly unjust acts upon the Bulgarian populations.

\t\t
\t\t\t

\t\t\t
Konstantin Makovsky, The Bulgarian Martyresses, a painting depicting the atrocities of bashibazouks in Bulgaria.

\t\t\t

\t\t

\t\t
\t\t\t

\t\t\t
Two Hawks by Vasily Vereshchagin, showing two Bashibazouks held captive by the Bulgarian and Russian army.

\t\t\t

\t\t

\t\t
\t\t\t

\t\t\t
Bashi-Bazouks, returning with the spoils from the Romanian shore of the Danube. 1877 engraving.

\t\t\t

\t\t

International reaction to atrocities in Bulgaria

Word of the bashi-bazouks' atrocities filtered to the outside world by way of the American-run Robert College located in Constantinople. The majority of the students were Bulgarian, and many received news of the events from their families back home. Soon the Western diplomatic community in Constantinople was abuzz with rumours, which eventually found their way into newspapers in the West. While in Constantinople in 1879, Protestant missionary George Warren Wood reported Turkish authorities in Amasia brutally persecuting Christian Armenian refugees from Soukoum Kaleh. He was able to coordinate with British diplomat Edward Malet to bring the matter to the attention of the Sublime Porte, and then to the British foreign secretary Robert Gascoyne-Cecil (the Marquess of Salisbury). In Britain, where Disraeli's government was committed to supporting the Ottomans in the ongoing Balkan crisis, the Liberal opposition newspaper Daily News hired American journalist Januarius A. MacGahan to report on the massacre stories firsthand.

MacGahan toured the stricken regions of the Bulgarian uprising, and his report, splashed across the Daily News's front pages, galvanized British public opinion against Disraeli's pro-Ottoman policy. In September, opposition leader William Gladstone published his Bulgarian Horrors and the Question of the East calling upon Britain to withdraw its support for Turkey and proposing that Europe demand independence for Bulgaria and Bosnia and Herzegovina. As the details became known across Europe, many dignitaries, including Charles Darwin, Oscar Wilde, Victor Hugo and Giuseppe Garibaldi, publicly condemned the Ottoman abuses in Bulgaria.

The strongest reaction came from Russia. Widespread sympathy for the Bulgarian cause led to a nationwide surge in patriotism on a scale comparable with the one during the Patriotic War of 1812. From autumn 1875, the movement to support the Bulgarian uprising involved all classes of Russian society. This was accompanied by sharp public discussions about Russian goals in this conflict: Slavophiles, including Dostoevsky, saw in the impending war the chance to unite all Orthodox nations under Russia's helm, thus fulfilling what they believed was the historic mission of Russia, while their opponents, westernizers, inspired by Turgenev, denied the importance of religion and believed that Russian goals should not be defense of Orthodoxy but liberation of Bulgaria.

Serbo-Turkish War and diplomatic maneuvering

Main articles: Serbo-Turkish War (1876–78), Constantinople Conference, and Expulsion of the Albanians 1877–1878

Serio-comic war map for 1877. Anti-Russian cartoon depicting Russia as a vicious octopus.

Russia preparing to release the Balkan dogs of war, while Britain warns him to take care. Punch cartoon from June 17, 1876

On June 30, 1876, Serbia, followed by Montenegro, declared war on the Ottoman Empire. In July and August, the ill-prepared and poorly equipped Serbian army helped by Russian volunteers failed to achieve offensive objectives but did manage to repulse the Ottoman offensive into Serbia. Meanwhile, Russia's Alexander II and Prince Gorchakov met Austria-Hungary's Franz Joseph I and Count Andrássy in the Reichstadt castle in Bohemia. No written agreement was made, but during the discussions, Russia agreed to support Austrian occupation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Austria-Hungary, in exchange, agreed to support the return of Southern Bessarabia—lost by Russia during the Crimean War—and Russian annexation of the port of Batum on the east coast of the Black Sea. Bulgaria was to become autonomous (independent, according to the Russian records).

As the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina continued, Serbia suffered a string of setbacks and asked the European powers to mediate an end to the war. A joint ultimatum by the European powers forced the Porte to give Serbia a one-month truce and start peace negotiations. Turkish peace conditions however were refused by European powers as too harsh. In early October, after the truce expired, the Turkish army resumed its offensive and the Serbian position quickly became desperate. On October 31, Russia issued an ultimatum requiring the Ottoman Empire to stop the hostilities and sign a new truce with Serbia within 48 hours. This was supported by the partial mobilization of the Russian army (up to 20 divisions). The Sultan accepted the conditions of the ultimatum.

To resolve the crisis, on December 11, 1876, the Constantinople Conference of the Great Powers was opened in Constantinople (to which the Turks were not invited). A compromise solution was negotiated, granting autonomy to Bulgaria, Bosnia and Herzegovina under the joint control of European powers. The Ottomans, however, refused to sacrifice their independence by allowing international representatives to oversee the institution of reforms and sought to discredit the conference by announcing on December 23, the day the conference was closed, that a constitution was adopted that declared equal rights for religious minorities within the Empire. The Ottomans attempted to use this manoeuver to get their objections and amendments to the agreement heard. When they were rejected by the Great Powers, the Ottoman Empire announced its decision to disregard the results of the conference.

On January 15, 1877, Russia and Austria-Hungary signed a written agreement confirming the results of an earlier Reichstadt Agreement in July 1876. This assured Russia of the benevolent neutrality of Austria-Hungary in the impending war. These terms meant that in case of war Russia would do the fighting and Austria would derive most of the advantage. Russia therefore made a final effort for a peaceful settlement. After reaching an agreement with its main Balkan rival and with anti-Ottoman sympathies running high throughout Europe due to the Bulgarian atrocities and the rejection of the Constantinople agreements, Russia finally felt free to declare war.

Course of the war

See also: Romanian War of Independence

Opening manoeuvres

Dragoons of Nizhny Novgorod pursuing the Turks near Kars, 1877, painting by Aleksey Kivshenko

Russia declared war on the Ottomans on 24 April 1877 and its troops entered Romania through the newly built Eiffel Bridge near Ungheni, on the Prut river. On April 12, 1877, Romania gave permission to the Russian troops to pass through its territory to attack the Turks, resulting in Turkish bombardments of Romanian towns on the Danube. On May 10, 1877, the Principality of Romania, which was under formal Turkish rule, declared its independence.

At the beginning of the war, the outcome was far from obvious. The Russians could send a larger army into the Balkans: about 300,000 troops were within reach. The Ottomans had about 200,000 troops on the Balkan peninsula, of which about 100,000 were assigned to fortified garrisons, leaving about 100,000 for the army of operation. The Ottomans had the advantage of being fortified, complete command of the Black Sea, and patrol boats along the Danube river. They also possessed superior arms, including new British and American-made rifles and German-made artillery.

Russian crossing of the Danube, June 1877, painting by Nikolai Dmitriev-Orenburgsky, 1883

In the event, however, the Ottomans usually resorted to passive defense, leaving the strategic initiative to the Russians, who, after making some mistakes, found a winning strategy for the war. The Ottoman military command in Constantinople made poor assumptions about Russian intentions. They decided that Russians would be too lazy to march along the Danube and cross it away from the delta, and would prefer the short way along the Black Sea coast. This would be ignoring the fact that the coast had the strongest, best supplied and garrisoned Turkish fortresses. There was only one well manned fortress along the inner part of the river Danube, Vidin. It was garrisoned only because the troops, led by Osman Pasha, had just taken part in defeating the Serbs in their recent war against the Ottoman Empire.

The Russian campaign was better planned, but it relied heavily on Turkish passivity. A crucial Russian mistake was sending too few troops initially; an expeditionary force of about 185,000 crossed the Danube in June, slightly fewer than the combined Turkish forces in the Balkans (about 200,000). After setbacks in July (at Pleven and Stara Zagora), the Russian military command realized it did not have the reserves to keep the offensive going and switched to a defensive posture. The Russians did not even have enough forces to blockade Pleven properly until late August, which effectively delayed the whole campaign for about two months.

Balkan theatre

Map of the Balkan Theater

At the start of the war, Russia and Romania destroyed all vessels along the Danube and mined the river, thus ensuring that Russian forces could cross the Danube at any point without resistance from the Ottoman navy. The Ottoman command did not appreciate the significance of the Russians' actions. In June, a small Russian unit crossed the Danube close to the delta, at Galați, and marched towards Ruschuk (today Ruse). This made the Ottomans even more confident that the big Russian force would come right through the middle of the Ottoman stronghold.

Russian, Romanian and Ottoman troop movements at Plevna

On 25–26 May, a Romanian torpedo boat with a mixed Romanian-Russian crew attacked and sank an Ottoman monitor on the Danube. Under the direct command of Major-General Mikhail Ivanovich Dragomirov, on the night of 27/28 June 1877 (NS) the Russians constructed a pontoon bridge across the Danube at Svishtov. After a short battle in which the Russians suffered 812 killed and wounded, the Russian secured the opposing bank and drove off the Ottoman infantry brigade defending Svishtov. At this point the Russian force was divided into three parts: the Eastern Detachment under the command of Tsarevich Alexander Alexandrovich, the future Tsar Alexander III of Russia, assigned to capture the fortress of Ruschuk and cover the army's eastern flank; the Western Detachment, to capture the fortress of Nikopol, Bulgaria and cover the army's western flank; and the Advance Detachment under Count Joseph Vladimirovich Gourko, which was assigned to quickly move via Veliko Tarnovo and penetrate the Balkan Mountains, the most significant barrier between the Danube and Constantinople.

Fighting near Ivanovo-Chiflik

Responding to the Russian crossing of the Danube, the Ottoman high command in Constantinople ordered Osman Nuri Paşa to advance east from Vidin and occupy the fortress of Nikopol, just west of the Russian crossing. On his way to Nikopol, Osman Pasha learned that the Russians had already captured the fortress and so moved to the crossroads town of Plevna (now known as Pleven), which he occupied with a force of approximately 15,000 on 19 July (NS). The Russians, approximately 9,000 under the command of General Schilder-Schuldner, reached Plevna early in the morning. Thus began the Siege of Plevna.

Osman Pasha organized a defense and repelled two Russian attacks with colossal casualties on the Russian side. At that point, the sides were almost equal in numbers and the Russian army was very discouraged. Most analysts agree that a counter-attack would have allowed the Ottomans to gain control of, and destroy, the Russians' bridge. However, Osman Pasha had orders to stay fortified in Plevna, and so he did not leave that fortress.

Gazi Osman Pasha

The Ottoman capitulation at Niğbolu (Nicopolis, modern Nikopol) in 1877 was significant, as it was the site of an important Ottoman victory in 1396 which marked the expansion of the Ottoman Empire into the Balkans.

Russia had no more troops to throw against Plevna, so the Russians besieged it, and subsequently asked the Romanians to provide extra troops. On August 9, Suleiman Pasha made an attempt to help Osman Pasha with 30,000 troops, but he was stopped by Bulgarians at the Battle of Shipka Pass. After three days of fighting, the volunteers were relieved by a Russian force led by General Radezky, and the Turkish forces withdrew. Soon afterwards, Romanian forces crossed the Danube and joined the siege. On August 16, at Gorni-Studen, the armies (West Army group) around Plevna were placed under the command of the Romanian Prince Carol I, aided by the Russian general Pavel Dmitrievich Zotov and the Romanian general Alexandru Cernat.

The Turks maintained several fortresses around Pleven which the Russian and Romanian forces gradually reduced. The Romanian 4th Division led by General Gheorghe Manu took the Grivitsa redoubt after four bloody assaults and managed to keep it until the very end of the siege. The siege of Plevna (July–December 1877) turned to victory only after Russian and Romanian forces cut off all supply routes to the fortified Ottomans. With supplies running low, Osman Pasha made an attempt to break the Russian siege in the direction of Opanets. On December 9, in the middle of the night the Ottomans threw bridges over the Vit River and crossed it, attacked on a 2-mile (3.2 km) front and broke through the first line of Russian trenches. Here they fought hand to hand and bayonet to bayonet, with little advantage to either side. Outnumbering the Ottomans almost 5 to 1, the Russians drove the Ottomans back across the Vit. Osman Pasha was wounded in the leg by a stray bullet, which killed his horse beneath him. Making a brief stand, the Ottomans eventually found themselves driven back into the city, losing 5,000 men to the Russians' 2,000. The next day, Osman surrendered the city, the garrison, and his sword to the Romanian colonel, Mihail Cerchez. He was treated honorably, but his troops perished in the snows by the thousand as they straggled off into captivity.

Taking of the Grivitsa redoubt by the Russians – a few hours later the redoubt was recaptured by the Ottomans and fell to the Romanians on 30 August 1877 in what became known as the "Third Battle of Grivitsa".

At this point Serbia, having finally secured monetary aid from Russia, declared war on the Ottoman Empire again. This time there were far fewer Russian officers in the Serbian army but this was more than offset by the experience gained from the 1876–77 war. Under nominal command of prince Milan Obrenović (effective command was in hands of general Kosta Protić, the army chief of staff), the Serbian Army went on offensive in what is now eastern south Serbia. A planned offensive into the Ottoman Sanjak of Novi Pazar was called off due to strong diplomatic pressure from Austria-Hungary, which wanted to prevent Serbia and Montenegro from coming into contact, and which had designs to spread Austria-Hungary's influence through the area. The Ottomans, outnumbered unlike two years before, mostly confined themselves to passive defence of fortified positions. By the end of hostilities the Serbs had captured Ak-Palanka (today Bela Palanka), Pirot, Niš and Vranje.

Battle at bridge Skit, November 1877

Russians under Field Marshal Joseph Vladimirovich Gourko succeeded in capturing the passes at the Stara Planina mountain, which were crucial for maneuvering. Next, both sides fought a series of battles for Shipka Pass. Gourko made several attacks on the Pass and eventually secured it. Ottoman troops spent much effort to recapture this important route, to use it to reinforce Osman Pasha in Pleven, but failed. Eventually Gourko led a final offensive that crushed the Ottomans around Shipka Pass. The Ottoman offensive against Shipka Pass is considered one of the major mistakes of the war, as other passes were virtually unguarded. At this time a huge number of Ottoman troops stayed fortified along the Black Sea coast and engaged in very few operations.

A Russian army crossed the Stara Planina by a high snowy pass in winter, guided and helped by local Bulgarians, not expected by the Ottoman army, and defeated the Turks at the Battle of Tashkessen and took Sofia. The way was now open for a quick advance through Plovdiv and Edirne to Constantinople.

Besides the Romanian Army (which mobilized 130,000 men, losing 10,000 of them to this war), more than 12,000 volunteer Bulgarian troops (Opalchenie) from the local Bulgarian population as well as many hajduk detachments fought in the war on the side of the Russians.

Caucasian theatre

Russian troops repulsing a Turkish assault against the fortress of Beyazid on June 8, 1877, oil painting by Lev Feliksovich Lagorio, 1891

The Russian Caucasus Corps was stationed in Georgia and Armenia, composed of approximately 50,000 men and 202 guns under the overall command of Grand Duke Michael Nikolaevich, Governor General of the Caucasus. The Russian force stood opposed by an Ottoman Army of 100,000 men led by General Ahmed Muhtar Pasha. While the Russian army was better prepared for the fighting in the region, it lagged behind technologically in certain areas such as heavy artillery and was outgunned, for example, by the superior long-range Krupp artillery that Germany had supplied to the Ottomans.

The Caucasus Corps was led by a quartet of Armenian commanders: Generals Mikhail Loris-Melikov, Arshak Ter-Gukasov (Ter-Ghukasov/Ter-Ghukasyan), Ivan Lazarev and Beybut Shelkovnikov. Forces under Lieutenant-General Ter-Gukasov, stationed near Yerevan, commenced the first assault into Ottoman territory by capturing the town of Bayazid on April 27, 1877. Capitalizing on Ter-Gukasov's victory there, Russian forces advanced, taking the region of Ardahan on May 17; Russian units also besieged the city of Kars in the final week of May, although Ottoman reinforcements lifted the siege and drove them back. Bolstered by reinforcements, in November 1877 General Lazarev launched a new attack on Kars, suppressing the southern forts leading to the city and capturing Kars itself on November 18. On February 19, 1878 the strategic fortress town of Erzurum was taken by the Russians after a lengthy siege. Although they relinquished control of Erzerum to the Ottomans at the end the war, the Russians acquired the regions of Batum, Ardahan, Kars, Olti, and Sarikamish and reconstituted them into the Kars Oblast.

Kurdish uprising

As the Russo-Turkish war came to a close, a Kurdish uprising began. It was led by two brothers, Husayn and Osman Pasha. The rebellion held most of the region of Bohtan for 9 months. It was ended only through duplicity, after force of arms had failed.

Civilian government in Bulgaria during the war

Main article: Provisional Russian Administration in Bulgaria

Plevna Chapel near the walls of Kitay-gorod

After Bulgarian territories were liberated by the Imperial Russian Army during the war, they were governed initially by a provisional Russian administration, which was established in April 1877. The Treaty of Berlin (1878) provided for the termination of this provisional Russian administration in May 1879, when the Principality of Bulgaria and Eastern Rumelia were established. The main objectives of the temporary Russian administration were to secure peace and order and to prepare for a revival of the Bulgarian state.

Aftermath

Intervention by the Great Powers

Europe after the Congress of Berlin in 1878 and the territorial and political rearrangement of the Balkan Peninsula.

Under pressure from the British, Russia accepted the truce offered by the Ottoman Empire on January 31, 1878, but continued to move towards Constantinople.

The British sent a fleet of battleships to intimidate Russia from entering the city, and Russian forces stopped at San Stefano. Eventually Russia entered into a settlement under the Treaty of San Stefano on March 3, by which the Ottoman Empire would recognize the independence of Romania, Serbia, and Montenegro, and the autonomy of Bulgaria.

Alarmed by the extension of Russian power into the Balkans, the Great Powers later forced modifications of the treaty in the Congress of Berlin. The main change here was that Bulgaria would be split, according to earlier agreements among the Great Powers that precluded the creation of a large new Slavic state: the northern and eastern parts to become principalities as before (Bulgaria and Eastern Rumelia), though with different governors; and the Macedonian region, originally part of Bulgaria under San Stefano, would return to direct Ottoman administration.

Effects on Bulgaria's Muslim and Christian populations

Turkish refugees fleeing from Tarnovo towards Shumen

Bones of massacred Bulgarians at Stara Zagora (Ethnic cleansing by the Ottoman Empire)

Circassian horseman, during the Russo-Turkish War

Muslim civilian casualties during the war are often estimated in the tens of thousands. The perpetrators of those massacres are also disputed, with American historian Justin McCarthy, claiming that they were carried out by Russian soldiers, Cossacks as well as Bulgarian volunteers and villagers, though there were few civilian casualties in battle. while James J. Reid claims that Circassians were significantly responsible for the refugee flow, that there were civilian casualties from battle and even that the Ottoman army was responsible for casualties among the Muslim population. According to John Joseph the Russian troops made frequent massacres of Muslim peasants to prevent them from disrupting their supply and troop movements. During the Battle of Harmanli accompanying this retaliation on Muslim non-combatants, it was reported that a huge group of Muslim townspeople were attacked by the Russian army, which as a result thousands died and their goods confiscated. The correspondent of the Daily News describes as an eyewitness the burning of four or five Turkish villages by the Russian troops in response to the Turks firing at the Russians from the villages, instead of behind rocks or trees, which must have appeared to the Russian soldiers as guerrilla attempts by the local Muslim populace upon the Russian contingencies operating against the Ottoman forces embedded in the area.

The number of Muslim refugees is estimated by R.J. Crampton to be 130,000. Richard C. Frucht estimates that only half (700,000) of the prewar Muslim population remained after the war, 216,000 had died and the rest emigrated. Douglas Arthur Howard estimates that half the 1.5 million Muslims, for the most part Turks, in prewar Bulgaria had disappeared by 1879. 200,000 had died, the rest became permanently refugees in Ottoman territories. However, according to one estimate, the total population of Bulgaria in its postwar borders was about 2.8 million in 1871, while according to official censuses, the total population was 2.823 million in 1880/81. And as such would make the aforementioned claim of 216,000 - 2.8 millions of persons dead due to Russian engagement and the subsequent fleeing of the majority of the Muslim population highly questionable.

During the conflict a number of Muslim buildings and cultural centres were destroyed. A large library of old Turkish books was destroyed when a mosque in Turnovo was burned in 1877. Most mosques in Sofia were destroyed, seven of them in one night in December 1878 when a thunderstorm masked the noise of the explosions arranged by Russian military engineers."

The Christian population, especially in the initial stages of the war, that found itself in the path of the Ottoman armies also suffered greatly.

The most notable massacre of Bulgarian civilians took part after the July battle of Stara Zagora when Gurko's forces had to retreat back to the Shipka pass. In the aftermath of the battle Suleiman Pasha's forces burned down and plundered the town of Stara Zagora which by that time was one of the largest towns in the Bulgarian lands. The number of massacred Christian civilians during the battle is estimated at 15,000. Suleiman Pasha's forces also established in the whole valley of the Maritsa river a system of terror taking form in the hanging at the street corners of every Bulgarian who had in any way assisted the Russians, but even villages that had not assisted the Russians were destroyed and their inhabitants massacred. As a result, as many as 100,000 civilian Bulgarians fled north to the Russian occupied territories. Later on in the campaign the Ottoman forces planned to burn the town of Sofia after Gurko had managed to overcome their resistance in the passes of Western part of the Balkan Mountains. Only the refusal of the Italian Consul Vito Positano, the French Vice Consul Léandre François René le Gay and the Austro–Hungarian Vice Consul to leave Sofia prevented that from happening. After the Ottoman retreat, Positano even organized armed detachments to protect the population from marauders (regular Ottoman Army deserters, bashi-bazouks and Circassians).

Bulgarian historians claim that 30,000 civilian Bulgarians were killed during the war, two thirds of which occurred in the Stara Zagora area.

Effects on Bulgaria's Jewish population

Many Jewish communities in their entirety fled with the retreating Turks as their protectors. The Bulletins de l'Alliance Israélite Universelle reported that thousands of Bulgarian Jews found refuge at the Ottoman capital of Constantinople.

Internationalization of the Armenian Question

Emigration of Armenians into Georgia during the Russo-Turkish war

The conclusion of the Russo-Turkish war also led to the internationalization of the Armenian Question. Many Armenians in the eastern provinces (Turkish Armenia) of the Ottoman Empire greeted the advancing Russians as liberators. Violence and instability directed at Armenians during the war by Kurd and Circassian bands had left many Armenians looking toward the invading Russians as the ultimate guarantors of their security. In January 1878, Armenian Patriarch of Constantinople Nerses II Varzhapetian approached the Russian leadership with the view of receiving assurances that the Russians would introduce provisions in the prospective peace treaty for self-administration in the Armenian provinces. Though not as explicit, Article 16 of the Treaty of San Stefano read:

As the evacuation of the Russian troops of the territory they occupy in Armenia, and which is to be restored to Turkey, might give rise to conflicts and complications detrimental to the maintenance of good relations between the two countries, the Sublime Porte engaged to carry into effect, without further delay, the improvements and reforms demanded by local requirements in the provinces inhabited by Armenians and to guarantee their security from Kurds and Circassians.

Great Britain, however, took objection to Russia holding on to so much Ottoman territory and forced it to enter into new negotiations by convening the Congress of Berlin in June 1878. An Armenian delegation led by prelate Mkrtich Khrimian traveled to Berlin to present the case of the Armenians but, much to its chagrin, was left out of the negotiations. Article 16 was modified and watered down, and all mention of the Russian forces remaining in the provinces was removed. In the final text of the Treaty of Berlin, it was transformed into Article 61, which read:

The Sublime Porte undertakes to carry out, without further delay, the improvements and reforms demanded by local requirements in the provinces inhabited by Armenians, and to guarantee their security against the Circassians and Kurds. It will periodically make known the steps taken to this effect to the powers, who will superintend their application.

As it turned out, the reforms were not forthcoming. Khrimian returned to Constantinople and delivered a famous speech in which he likened the peace conference to a "'big cauldron of Liberty Stew' into which the big nations dipped their 'iron ladles' for real results, while the Armenian delegation had only a 'Paper Ladle'. 'Ah dear Armenian people,' Khrimian said, 'could I have dipped my Paper Ladle in the cauldron it would sog and remain there! Where guns talk and sabers shine, what significance do appeals and petitions have?'" Given the absence of tangible improvements in the plight of the Armenian community, a number of Armenian intellectuals living in Europe and Russia in the 1880s and 1890s formed political parties and revolutionary societies to secure better conditions for their compatriots in Ottoman Armenia and other parts of the Ottoman Empire.

Atrocities and ethnic cleansing

Both sides carried out massacres and an ethnic cleansing policy during the war.

Against Turks

Turkish refugees fleeing from Tarnovo towards Shumen

In January 1878, Russian and Bulgarian forces started commiting atrocities against Muslim population in region such as Harmanli massacre. British reports from that time has detailed information about atrocities and massacres. According to those reports, in İssova Bâlâ, 96 of the 170 houses in village and the school were burned to the ground. The inhabitants of Yukarı Sofular were slaughtered and 12 of the 130 houses in village, a mosque and a school was burned. In Kozluca, 18 Turks were killed. Massacres of Muslim inhabitants occurred in Harmanli and Kazanlak too. In the village called Muflis, 127 Muslim inhabitants were kidnapped to kill by a group of Russian and Bulgarian troops. 20 of them managed to escape, but rest were killed. 400 people from Muflis were killed according to Ottoman sources. 11 inhabitants were killed in Keçidere.

Many villages in the Kars region were pillaged by Russian army during the war. The war in Caucasus caused many Muslims to migrate to remaining Ottoman lands, mostly in poverty and with poor conditions. Between 1878-1881, 82,000 Muslims migrated to Ottoman Empire from lands ceded to Russia in Caucasus.

There are different guesses about losses during Russo-Turkish War. Dennis Hupchik and Justin McCarthy says 260,000 people went missing and 500,000 became refugees. Kemal Karpat claims 300,000 Turks were killed and 1 to 1,5 million people were forced to migrate. Nedim İpek gives the same numbers as Karpat. Another American source claims 400,000 Turks were massacred and 1,000,000 Turks had to migrate during war.

Against Bulgarians

Remains from the Stara Zagora massacre

Ottoman Army carried many massacres against Bulgarian civilians during the war, the most significant one being Stara Zagora massacre in which Suleiman Pasha's Ottoman Army, composed mainly of 48,000 Albanian troops massacred 18,000 Bulgarian civilians.

Lasting effects

International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement

The Red Cross and the Red Crescent emblems

This war caused a division in the emblems of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement which continues to this day. Both Russia and the Ottoman Empire had signed the First Geneva Convention (1864), which made the Red Cross, a colour reversal of the flag of neutral Switzerland, the sole emblem of protection for military medical personnel and facilities. However, during this war the cross instead reminded the Ottomans of the Crusades; so they elected to replace the cross with the Red Crescent instead. This ultimately became the symbol of the Movement's national societies in most Muslim countries, and was ratified as an emblem of protection by later Geneva Conventions in 1929 and again in 1949 (the current version).

Iran, which neighbored both the Russian Empire and Ottoman Empire, considered them to be rivals, and probably considered the Red Crescent in particular to be an Ottoman symbol; except for the Red Crescent being centred and without a star, it is a colour reversal of the Ottoman flag (and the modern Turkish flag). This appears to have led to their national society in the Movement being initially known as the Red Lion and Sun Society, using a red version of the Lion and Sun, a traditional Iranian symbol. After the Iranian Revolution of 1979, Iran switched to the Red Crescent, but the Geneva Conventions continue to recognize the Red Lion and Sun as an emblem of protection.

In popular culture

The novella Jalaleddin, published in 1878 by the novelist Raffi describes the Kurdish massacres of Armenians in the Eastern Ottoman Empire at the time of the Russo-Turkish War. The novella follows the journey of a young man through the mountains of Anatolia. The historical descriptions in the novella correspond with information from British sources at the time.

The novel The Doll (Polish title: Lalka), written in 1887–1889 by Bolesław Prus, describes consequences of the Russo-Turkish war for merchants living in Russia and partitioned Poland. The main protagonist helped his Russian friend, a multi-millionaire, and made a fortune supplying the Russian Army in 1877–1878. The novel describes trading during political instability, and its ambiguous results for Russian and Polish societies.

The 1912 silent film Independența României depicted the war in Romania.

Russian writer Boris Akunin uses the war as the setting for the novel The Turkish Gambit (1998).

See also

Battles of the Russo-Turkish War (1877–78)

Ottoman fleet organisation during the Russo-Turkish War (1877–78)

Batak massacre

Romanian War of Independence

Harmanli massacre

History of the Balkans

Provisional Russian Administration in Bulgaria

The Turkish Gambit

Marche slave

Notes

References

^ Timothy C. Dowling. Russia at War: From the Mongol Conquest to Afghanistan, Chechnya, and Beyond. 2 Volumes. ABC-CLIO, 2014. P. 748

^ Menning B. W. Bayonets before Bullets: the Imperial Russian Army, 1861-1914. Indiana University Press, 2000. P. 55. ISBN 0-253-21380-0

^ Olender P. Russo-Turkish Naval War 1877-1878. 2017. STRATUS. P. 88. ISBN 978-83-65281-36-4

^ Мерников, АГ (2005), Спектор А. А. Всемирная история войн (in Russian), Minsk, p. 376

^ a b Урланис Б. Ц. (1960). "Войны в период домонополистического капитализма (Ч. 2)". Войны и народонаселение Европы. Людские потери вооруженных сил европейских стран в войнах XVII—XX вв. (Историко-статистическое исследование). М.: Соцэкгиз. pp. 104–105, 129 § 4.

^ Scafes, Cornel, et. al., Armata Romania in Razvoiul de Independenta 1877–1878 (The Romanian Army in the War of Independence 1877–1878). Bucuresti, Editura Sigma, 2002, p. 149 (Romence)

^ a b Борис Урланис, Войны и народонаселение Европы, Часть II, Глава II http://scepsis.net/library/id_2140.html

^ a b Мерников А. Г.; Спектор А. А. (2005). Всемирная история войн. Мн.: Харвест. ISBN 985-13-2607-0.

^ Crowe, John Henry Verrinder (1911). "Russo-Turkish Wars (1828–29 and 1877–1878 – The War of 1877-78)". The Encyclopaedia Britannica; A Dictionary of Arts, Sciences, Literature and General Information. XXIII (REFECTORY to SAINTE-BEUVE) (11th ed.). Cambridge, England and New York: At the University Press. pp. 931–936. Retrieved 19 July 2018 – via Internet Archive.

^ Mrŭchkov, Vasil (2011). Labour Law in Bulgaria. Kluwer Law International. p. 120. ISBN 978-9-041-13616-9.

^ 
Sygkelos, Yannis (2011). Nationalism from the Left: The Bulgarian Communist Party During the Second World War and the Early Post-War Years. Brill. p. 220. ISBN 978-9-004-19208-9.

^ Hatt-ı Hümayun (full text), Turkey: Anayasa.

^ Vatikiotis, PJ (1997), The Middle East, London: Routledge, p. 217, ISBN 0-415-15849-4.

^ Argyll 1879.

^ a b "Lebanon", Country Studies, US: Library of Congress, 1994.

^ Churchill, C (1862), The Druzes and the Maronites under the Turkish rule from 1840 to 1860, London: B Quaritch, p. 219.

^ a b Shaw & Shaw 1977, pp. 142–43.

^ Robson, Maureen M. (1960). "Lord Clarendon and the Cretan Question, 1868-9". The Historical Journal. 3 (1): 38–55. doi:10.1017/S0018246X00023001.

^ Stillman, William James (March 15, 2004), The Autobiography of a Journalist (ebook), II, The Project Gutenberg, eBook#11594.

^ Argyll 1879, p. 122.

^ Finkel, Caroline (2005), The History of the Ottoman Empire, New York: Basic Books, p. 467.

^ Shaw & Shaw 1977, p. 146.

^ Parker, Franklin; Parker, Betty June. Reforms cost money, and the Kosovars resented new taxes and conscription. In the Russo-Turkish war of 1875-1878, Albanian and other Muslims fought against the Ottomans. ." (PDF). Retrieved 9 April 2020.

^ Hupchick 2002, p. 264.

^ a b c Jonassohn 1999, pp. 209–10.

^ Eversley, Baron George Shaw-Lefevre (1924), The Turkish empire from 1288 to 1914, p. 319.

^ Jonassohn 1999, p. 210.

^ (Editorial staff) (4 December 1915). "Massacre". New Statesman. 6 (139): 201–202. ; see p. 202.

^ Jelavich, Charles; Jelavich, Barbara (1977), The Establishment of the Balkan National States, 1804–1920, Seattle, Washington, USA: University of Washington Press, p. 139, ISBN 9780295803609.

^ Parliamentary Papers, House of Commons and Command, Volume 80. Constantinople: Great Britain. Parliament. House of Commons. 1880. pp. 70–72. Retrieved 3 January 2017.

^ MacGahan, Januarius A. (1876). Turkish Atrocities in Bulgaria, Letters of the Special Commissioner of the 'Daily News,' J.A. MacGahan, Esq., with An Introduction & Mr. Schuyler's Preliminary Report. London: Bradbury Agnew and Co. Retrieved 26 January 2016.

^ Gladstone 1876.

^ Gladstone 1876, p. 64.

^ "The liberation of Bulgaria", History of Bulgaria, US: Bulgarian embassy, archived from the original on 2010-10-11.

^ Хевролина, ВМ, Россия и Болгария: "Вопрос Славянский — Русский Вопрос" (in Russian), RU: Lib FL, archived from the original on October 28, 2007.

^ Potemkin, VP, History of world diplomacy 15th century BC – 1940 AD, RU: Diphis.

^ Chronology of events from 1856 to 1997 period relating to the Romanian monarchy, Ohio: Kent State University, archived from the original on 2007-12-30

^ Schem, Alexander Jacob (1878), The War in the East: An illustrated history of the Conflict between Russia and Turkey with a Review of the Eastern Question.

^ Navypedia.org: Ottoman navy: Hizber river monitors

^ Menning, Bruce (2000), Bayonets before Bullets: The Imperial Russian Army, 1861–1914, Indiana University Press, p. 57.

^ von Herbert 1895, p. 131.

^ Reminiscences of the King of Roumania, Harper & Brothers, 1899, pp. 274–75.

^ Reminiscences of the King of Roumania, Harper & Brothers, 1899, p. 275.

^ Furneaux, Rupert (1958), The Siege of Pleven.

^ von Herbert 1895.

^ Menning. Bayonets before Bullets, p. 78.

^ Allen & Muratoff 1953, pp. 113–114.

^ Allen & Muratoff 1953, p. 546.

^ "Ռուս-Թուրքական Պատերազմ, 1877–1878", Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia  (in Armenian), 10, Yerevan: Armenian Academy of Sciences, 1984, pp. 93–94.

^ Walker, Christopher J. (2011). "Kars in the Russo-Turkish Wars of the Nineteenth Century". In Hovannisian, Richard G (ed.). Armenian Kars and Ani. Costa Mesa, California, USA: Mazda Publishers. pp. 217–220.

^ Melkonyan, Ashot (2011). "The Kars Oblast, 1878–1918". In Hovannisian, Richard G. (ed.). Armenian Kars and Ani. Costa Mesa, California, USA: Mazda Publishers. pp. 223–244.

^ Jwaideh, Wadie (2006-06-19). The Kurdish National Movement: Its Origins and Development. Syracuse University Press. p. 117. ISBN 9780815630937.

^ Българските държавни институции 1879–1986 . София (Sofia, Bulgaria): ДИ "Д-р Петър Берон". 1987. pp. 54–55.

^ L.S. Stavrianos, The Balkans Since 1453 (1958) pp 408-12.

^ Levene, Mark (2005), Genocide in the Age of the Nation State: The rise of the West and the coming of genocide, p. 225, ISBN 9781845110574.

^ McCarthy, J (2001), The Ottoman Peoples and the end of Empire, Oxford University Press, p. 48.

^ Reid 2000, pp. 42–43.

^ Medlicott, William Norton, The Congress of Berlin and after, p. 157

^ Joseph, John (1983), Muslim-Christian Relations and Inter-Christian Rivalries in the Middle East, p. 84.

^ Reid 2000, p. 324.

^ Crampton, RJ (1997), A Concise History of Bulgaria, Cambridge University Press, p. 426, ISBN 0-521-56719-X.

^ Frucht, Richard C (2005), Eastern Europe, p. 641.

^ Howard, Douglas Arthur (2001), The history of Turkey, p. 67

^ "Bulgaric", Europe, Popul stat.

^ Crampton, RJ (2007), Bulgaria, p. 424.

^ Crampton 2006, p. 111.

^ Crampton 2006, p. 114.

^ Argyll 1879, p. 49.

^ Greene, Francis Vinton (1879). Report on the Russian Army and its Campaigns in Turkey in 1877–1878. D Appleton & Co. p. 204.

^ Ivanov, Dmitri (2005-11-08). "Позитано. "Души в окови (in Bulgarian). Sega. Archived from the original on 2011-07-19. Retrieved 2009-04-30.

^ Dimitrov, Bozhidar (2002), Russian-Turkish war 1877–1878 (in Bulgarian), p. 75.

^ Tamir, V., Bulgaria and Her Jews: A dubious symbiosis, 1979, p. 94–95, Yeshiva University Press

^ Hertslet, Edward (1891), The Map of Europe by Treaty, 4, London: Butterworths, p. 2686.

^ Hurewitz, Jacob C (1956), Diplomacy in the Near and Middle East: A Documentary Record 1535–1956, I, Princeton, NJ: Van Nostrand, p. 190.

^ Balkian, Peter. The Burning Tigris: The Armenian Genocide and America's Response. New York: HarperCollins, 2003, p. 44.

^ Hovannisian, Richard G (1997), "The Armenian Question in the Ottoman Empire, 1876–1914", in Hovannisian, Richard G (ed.), The Armenian People From Ancient to Modern Times, Volume II: Foreign Dominion to Statehood: The Fifteenth Century to the Twentieth Century, New York: St Martin's Press, pp. 206–12, ISBN 0-312-10168-6.

^ THE TURKISH CAMPAIGN.; NOTES FROM THE OTTOMAN CAPITAL. REFUGEES AT CONSTANTINOPLE--DOING JUSTICE TO THE TURKS--A GOOD WORD FOR THE MUSSULMANS--ATTEMPTED APOSTASY OF A WOMAN--NEWS FROM THE FRONT--THE TWO GHAZIS. 14 Aralık 1877 Çarşamba, The New York Times, , 23 Kasım 1877, The New York Times

^ David Gillard, Kenneth Bourne, Donald Cameron Watt, Great Britain. Foreign Office. British documents on foreign affairs--reports and papers from the Foreign Office confidential print (1984), University Publications of America, sf. 150.

^ David Gillard, Kenneth Bourne, Donald Cameron Watt, Great Britain. Foreign Office. British documents on foreign affairs--reports and papers from the Foreign Office confidential print (1984), University Publications of America, sf. 197.

^ British documents on foreign affairs--reports and papers from the Foreign Office confidential print, sf. 152.

^ British documents on foreign affairs--reports and papers from the Foreign Office confidential print, sf. 163.

^ British documents on foreign affairs--reports and papers from the Foreign Office confidential print, sf. 176.

^ a b British documents on foreign affairs--reports and papers from the Foreign Office confidential print, sf. 268.

^ Russian Attrocities in Asia and Europe (1877), İstanbul, No. 51.

^ Russian Attrocities in Asia and Europe (1877), İstanbul, No. 51.

^ Incorporated, Facts On File (2009). Encyclopedia of the Peoples of Africa and the Middle East. Infobase Publishing. p. 244. ISBN 9781438126760.

^ Brockhaus and Efron Encyclopedic Dictionary. "Kars oblast". St. Petersburg, Russia, 1890-1907

^ Hupchick 2002, p. 265.

^ McCarthy 1995, 64, 85 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFMcCarthy1995 (help).

^ Karpat, Kemal H., Studies on Ottoman social and political history: selected articles and essays, Brill, 2004, ISBN 9789004121010, p. 764. 

^ İpek, Nedim (1994), Turkish Migration from the Balkans to Anatolia, sf. 40-41

^ Library Information and Research Service. The Middle East, abstracts and index, Part 1 (1999), Northumberland Press, sf. 493, During that war nearly 400000 Rumelian Turks were massacred. About a million of them who fled before the invading Russian armies took refuge in the Thrace, lstanbul and Westem Anatolia

^ http://members.tripod.com/nie_monthly/nie11_01/slaveikov.htm

^ Statistika (54 ed.). Indiana University. 2002. p. 35.

^ Jalaleddin and the Russo-Turkish War of 1877-1878

Bibliography

Allen, William ED; Muratoff, Paul (1953). Caucasian Battlefields. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press..

Argyll, George Douglas Campbell (1879). The Eastern question from the Treaty of Paris 1836 to the Treaty of Berlin 1878 and to the Second Afghan War. 2. London: Strahan.

Crampton, RJ (2006) . A Concise History of Bulgaria. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-85085-1.

Gladstone, William Ewart (1876). Bulgarian Horrors and the Question of the East. London: William Clowes & Sons.

Greene, F.V. (1879). The Russian Army and its Campaigns in Turkey. New York: D.Appleton and Company. Retrieved July 19, 2018 – via Internet Archive.

von Herbert, Frederick William (1895). The Defence of Plevna 1877. London: Longmans, Green & Co. Retrieved 26 July 2018 – via Internet Archive.

Hupchick, D.P. (2002). The Balkans: From Constantinople to Communism. Palgrave. ISBN 1-4039-6417-3.

The War Correspondence of the "Daily News" 1877 with a Connecting Narrative Forming a Continuous History of the War Between Russia and Turkey to the Fall of Kars Including the Letters of Mr. Archibald Forbes, Mr. J. A. MacGahan and Many Other Special Correspondents in Europe and Asia. London: Macmillan and Co. 1878. Retrieved 26 July 2018 – via Internet Archive.

The War Correspondence of the "Daily News" 1877-1878 continued from the Fall of Kars to the Signature of the Preliminaries of Peace. London: Macmillan and Co. 1878. Retrieved 26 July 2018 – via Internet Archive.

Maurice, Major F. (1905). The Russo-Turkish War 1877; A Strategical Sketch. London: Swan Sonneschein. Retrieved August 8, 2018 – via Internet Archive.

Jonassohn, Kurt (1999). Genocide and gross human rights violations: in comparative perspective. ISBN 9781412824453.

Reid, James J (2000). Crisis of the Ottoman Empire: Prelude to Collapse 1839–1878. Stuttgart: Steiner. ISBN 9783515076876.

Shaw, Stanford J; Shaw, Ezel Kural (1977). History of the Ottoman Empire and Modern Turkey. 2, Reform, Revolution, and Republic: The Rise of Modern Turkey 1808–1975. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521291637.

Stavrianos, L.S. (1958). The Balkans Since 1453. pp. 393–412.

Further reading

Acar, Keziban (March 2004). "An examination of Russian Imperialism: Russian Military and intellectual descriptions of the Caucasians during the Russo-Turkish War of 1877–1878". Nationalities Papers. 32 (1): 7–21. doi:10.1080/0090599042000186151.

Baleva, Martina. "The Empire Strikes Back. Image Battles and Image Frontlines during the Russo-Turkish War of 1877–1878." Ethnologia Balkanica 16 (2012): 273-294. online

Dennis, Brad. "Patterns of Conflict and Violence in Eastern Anatolia Leading Up to the Russo-Turkish War and the Treaty of Berlin." War and Diplomacy: The Russo-Turkish War of 1878 (1877): 273-301.

Drury, Ian. The Russo-Turkish War 1877 (Bloomsbury Publishing, 2012).

Glenny, Misha (2012), The Balkans: Nationalism, War, and the Great Powers, 1804–2011, New York: Penguin.

Isci, Onur. "Russian and Ottoman Newspapers in the War of 1877–1878." Russian History 41.2 (2014): 181-196. online

Murray, Nicholas. The Rocky Road to the Great War: the Evolution of Trench Warfare to 1914. (Potomac Books, 2013).

Neuburger, Mary. "The Russo‐Turkish war and the ‘Eastern Jewish question’: Encounters between victims and victors in Ottoman Bulgaria, 1877–8." East European Jewish Affairs 26.2 (1996): 53-66.

Stone, James. "Reports from the Theatre of War. Major Viktor von Lignitz and the Russo-Turkish War, 1877–78." Militärgeschichtliche Zeitschrift 71.2 (2012): 287-307. online contains primary sources

Todorov, Nikolai. "The Russo-Turkish War of 1877-1878 and the Liberation of Bulgaria: An Interpretative Essay." East European Quarterly 14.1 (1980): 9+ online

Yavuz, M. Hakan, and Peter Sluglett, eds. War and diplomacy: the Russo-Turkish war of 1877-1878 and the treaty of Berlin (U of Utah Press, 2011).

External links

 Media related to Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878) at Wikimedia Commons

 Wikisource has the text of a 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article about Russo-Turkish War (1877–78).

Seegel, Steven J, Virtual War, Virtual Journalism?: Russian Media Responses to 'Balkan' Entanglements in Historical Perspective, 1877–2001 (PDF), USA: Brown University.

Military History: Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878), Digital book index.

Sowards, Steven W, Twenty Five Lectures on Modern Balkan History, MSU, archived from the original on October 15, 2007.

"Russo-Turkish War of 1877–1878 and the Exploits of Liberators", Grand war (in Russian), Kulichki.

The Romanian Army of the Russo-Turkish War 1877–1878, AOL.

Erastimes (image gallery) (in Bulgarian), 8M, archived from the original on October 13, 2006

Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878). Historical photos.

Video links

130 years Liberation of Pleven (Plevna)

Zelenogorsky, Najden (3 March 2007), Mayor of Pleven (speech), archived from the original (video) on 25 October 2007, retrieved 30 April 2007.

Stanishev, Sergej (3 March 2007), Bulgarian Prime Minister (speech), archived from the original (video) on 25 October 2007, retrieved 30 April 2007.

Potapov (3 March 2007), Ambassador of Russia in Bulgaria (speech), archived from the original (video) on 24 October 2007, retrieved 30 April 2007.

v

t

e

Diplomacy of the Great Powers (1871–1913)

Great powers 
Austria–Hungary

France

Germany

Italy

Japan

Russia

United Kingdom

United States

Alliances 
Triple Alliance
Dual Alliance

Triple Entente
Franco-Russian Alliance

Entente Cordiale

Anglo-Russian Convention

Anglo-Japanese Alliance

League of the Three Emperors

Eight-Nation Alliance

Trends 
European balance of power

Ottoman decline
Eastern Question

Spread of nationalism

Sovereign debt

Revanchism

Pax Britannica

New Imperialism
Scramble for Africa
Egyptian Lever

In Asia
The Great Game

Meiji period

Pan-Slavism
Balkan League

Great Game

The Great Rapprochement

Second Industrial Revolution
Industrial warfare

Treaties and

agreements 
Treaty of Versailles (1871)
Treaty of Frankfurt

Treaty of Berlin

Reinsurance Treaty

Treaty of Paris

Treaty of Björkö

Taft–Katsura Agreement

Hague Conventions
Martens Clause

Japan–Korea Treaty of 1905

Japan–Korea Annexation Treaty

Racconigi agreement

Events 
Unification of Germany

Unification of Italy

Congress of Berlin

Berlin Conference

Weltpolitik

Naval arms races
Anglo-German
Dreadnought

German Naval Laws

Austro-Italian

Fashoda Incident

Annexation of Hawaii

Venezuela Naval Blockade

First Moroccan Crisis
Algeciras Conference

Second Moroccan Crisis
Treaty of Fez

Bosnian Crisis

July Crisis

Wars 
Russo-Turkish

Anglo-Egyptian

First Sino-Japanese

Spanish–American

Banana Wars

Philippine–American

Boxer Rebellion

Second Boer

Russo-Japanese

Italo-Turkish

Balkan Wars
First

Second

Albanian Revolts
First

Second

Third

v

t

e

Armed conflicts involving Russia (incl. Imperial and Soviet times)

Internal 
Razin's Rebellion

Bulavin Rebellion

Pugachev's Rebellion

Decembrist revolt

Russian Civil War

August Uprising

Coup d'état attempt (1991)

1993 Russian constitutional crisis

First Chechen War

War of Dagestan

Second Chechen War

Insurgency in the North Caucasus

Pre-17th

century 
Muscovite–Volga Bulgars war (1376)

First Muscovite–Lithuanian War (1492–1494)

Russo-Swedish War (1495–1497)

Second Muscovite–Lithuanian War (1500–1503)

Third Muscovite–Lithuanian War (1507–08)

Fourth Muscovite–Lithuanian War (1512–1522)

Fifth Muscovite–Lithuanian War (1534–1537)

Russo-Crimean Wars

Russo-Kazan Wars

Russo-Swedish War (1554–1557)

Livonian War

Russian Conquest of Siberia (1580–1747)

Russo-Swedish War (1590–1595)

Polish–Muscovite War (1605–1618) and the Time of Troubles

Ingrian War

Smolensk War

Russo-Persian War (1651–1653)

Sino-Russian border conflicts (1652–1689)

Russo-Polish War (1654–1667)

Deluge

Second Northern War

Russo-Turkish War (1676–1681)

Russo-Turkish War (1686–1700)

18th–19th

century 
Great Northern War

Russo-Turkish War (1710–11)

Russo-Persian War (1722–23)

Russo-Persian Wars

War of the Polish Succession (1733–1738)

Austro-Russian–Turkish War (1735–1739)

War of the Austrian Succession (1740–1748)

Russo-Swedish War (1741–1743)

Seven Years' War

Russo-Turkish War (1768–1774)

Bar Confederation

Russo-Turkish War (1787–1792)

Russo-Swedish War (1788–1790)

Russo-Polish War (1792)

Kościuszko Uprising

Russo-Persian War (1796)

War of the Second Coalition

War of the Third Coalition

Russo-Persian War (1804–1813)

War of the Fourth Coalition

Russo-Turkish War (1806–1812)

Anglo-Russian War

Finnish War

War of the Fifth Coalition

French invasion of Russia

War of the Sixth Coalition

War of the Seventh Coalition

Russian conquest of the Caucasus

Caucasian War
Russo-Circassian War

Murid War

Russo-Persian War (1826–1828)

Russo-Turkish War (1828–29)

November Uprising

Hungarian Revolution of 1848

Crimean War

Amur Acquisition

January Uprising

Russian conquest of Central Asia
Russian conquest of Bukhara

Khivan campaign of 1873

Russo-Turkish War (1877–78)

Boxer Rebellion
Russian invasion of Manchuria

20th

century 
Russo-Japanese War

Russian Invasion of Tabriz, 1911

World War I

Russian Civil War

Ukrainian–Soviet War

Finnish Civil War

Heimosodat

Soviet westward offensive of 1918–19
Estonian War of Independence

Latvian War of Independence

Lithuanian–Soviet War

Polish–Soviet War

Red Army invasion of Azerbaijan

Red Army invasion of Armenia

Red Army invasion of Georgia

Red Army intervention in Mongolia

Urtatagai conflict (1925–1926)

Sino-Soviet conflict (1929)

Soviet–Japanese border conflicts

Soviet invasion of Xinjiang

Xinjiang War (1937)

World War II
Soviet invasion of Poland

Winter War

Soviet occupation of the Baltic states (1940)

Soviet occupation of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina

Continuation War

Eastern Front (World War II)

Anglo-Soviet invasion of Iran

Soviet–Japanese War

Guerrilla war in the Baltic states

Ili Rebellion

First Indochina War

Korean War

Hungarian Revolution of 1956

Eritrean War of Independence

War of Attrition

Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia

Sino-Soviet border conflict

Vietnam War

Ogaden War

South African Border War

Soviet–Afghan War

Nagorno-Karabakh War

Transnistria War

Georgian Civil War

Tajikistani Civil War

21st

century 
Russo-Georgian War

Russo-Ukrainian War
Annexation of Crimea

War in Donbass

Intervention in Syria

Military history of Russia

Russian Winter

Russian Revolution

Cold War

Sphere of influence

v

t

e

Great Eastern Crisis

Wars and conflicts

Montenegrin 
Montenegrin–Turkish War (1876–78)

Serb 
Herzegovina uprising (1875–77)

Serbian–Turkish War (1876–78)

Kumanovo Uprising

Bulgarian 
April Uprising

Razlovtsi insurrection

Kresna–Razlog uprising

Greek 
1878 Greek Macedonian rebellion

Epirus Revolt of 1878

Cretan Revolt (1878)

Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)

Romanian War of Independence

Austro-Hungarian campaign in Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1878

Expulsion of the Albanians 1877–1878

International

agreements 
Berlin Memorandum

Reichstadt Agreement

Constantinople Conference

Budapest Convention of 1877

Treaty of San Stefano

Cyprus Convention

Congress of Berlin and Treaty of Berlin (1878)

See also 
Bulgarian Exarchate

Deligrad Event

Niš Committee

First Constitutional Era (Ottoman Empire)

Opalchentsi

Topola Rebellion

Eastern Question

Provisional Russian Administration in Bulgaria

British Cyprus

League of Prizren

Battles for Plav and Gusinje

Pact of Halepa

Dual Alliance (1879)

Brsjak revolt

Austro–Serbian Alliance of 1881

French conquest of Tunisia

Convention of Constantinople (1881)

British Occupation of Egypt

Marche slave

Anna Karenina

v

t

e

Abdul Hamid II

Ottoman Sultanate

(1887-1905) 
Ottoman constitution of 1876

Senate of the Ottoman Empire

Chamber of Deputies

First Constitutional Era

Hamidian massacres

War of '93

Ottoman Sultanate

(After 1905) 
Yıldız assassination attempt

Second Constitutional Era

31 March Incident

Sultanate period 
Yıldız Palace

Yıldız Hamidiye Mosque

Wars 
Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)

Greco-Turkish War (1897)

Family 
Tirimüjgan Kadın (mother)

Perestu Kadın (adoptive mother)

Abdulmejid I (father)

Abdülaziz (uncle)

Wives 
Nazikeda

Bedrifelek

Nurefsun

Bidar

Dilpesend

Mezidimestan

Emsalinur

Müşfika

Sazkar

Peyveste

Fatma Pesend

Behice

Saliha Naciye

 Category:Abdul Hamid II

v

t

e

Wars and battles involving Serbs

Medieval

Serbian–Bulgarian 
Bulgar–Serb War (839–842)

Bulgar–Serb War (853)

Bulgarian–Serbian wars of 917–924

Bulgarian–Serbian border revolt

Bulgarian-Serb War (998)

Bulgarian-Serbian War (1202)

Bulgarian-Serbian War (1203)

Bulgarian-Serbian War (1290)

Bulgarian-Serbian War (1291)

Bulgarian-Serbian War (1330)

Battle of Velbazhd

Serbian-Ottoman 
Early skirmishes
Battle of Gallipoli

Battle of Stephaniana

Battle of Demotika in 1352

Battle of Sırp Sındığı in 1364

Fall of the Serbian Empire
Battle of Maritsa in 1371

Battle of Dubravnica in 1381

Battle of Savra in 1385

Battle of Pločnik in 1386

Battle of Bileća in 1388

Battle of Kosovo in 1389

Serbian Despotate
Battle of Karanovasa

Battle of Tripolje in 1402

Siege of Novo Brdo in 1412

Battle of Vitosha Pass in 1413

Battle of Carmorlu

First Scutari War

Second Scutari War

Ottoman invasion of Serbia in 1425

Ottoman invasion of Serbia in 1427

Ottoman invasion of Serbia in 1437

Battle of Trnava (1430)

Ottoman invasion of Serbia in 1438

Ottoman invasion of Serbia (1439–44)

Crusade of Varna

Battle of Nish (1443)

Battle of Zlatitsa in 1443

Battle of Kunovica in 1444

Ottoman invasion of Serbia (1454–55)

Battle of Kruševac in 1454

Battle of Leskovac in 1454

Ottoman invasion of Serbia in 1456

Siege of Belgrade

Siege of Smederevo

Ottoman invasion and conquest of Serbia in 1459

Ottoman invasion and conquest of Bosnia in 1463
Siege of Jajce

Battle of Breadfield in 1479

Ottoman conquest of Zeta in 1499

Serbian-Byzantine 
Serb Uprising of 1038–42

Battle of Bar

Slav Uprising in Pomoravlje

Battle of Zvečan (1094)

Battle of Haram

Siege of Ras (1127)

Battle of Tara (1150)

Serbian rebellion (1149–1152)

Siege of Braničevo (1154)

Battle of Pantina

Byzantine–Hungarian War (1127–1129)

Byzantine civil war of 1321–1328

Serbian invasion of Macedonia led by Syrgiannes Palaiologos (1334)

Byzantine civil war of 1341–1347

Other 
Hungarian invasions of Europe

Magyar–Serb conflict

Byzantine–Hungarian War (1127–1129)

Battle of Sirmium

Battle of Gacko

Serbian conflict with the Nogai Horde

Mongol invasion of Bulgaria and Serbia

Mačva War

Hungarian–Serbian War (1321-1324)

War of Hum (1326–1329)

Serbian civil war of 1331

Serbian nobility conflict (1369)

Battle of Rovine

Battle of Nicopolis

Battle of Ankara

Bosnian–Ragusan War

Battle of Kosmidion

Battle of Çamurlu

Battle of Despotovac

Siege of Belgrade (1440)

Battle of Kosovo (1448)

Fall of Constantinople

Foreign rule

Habsburgs 
Jovan Nenad's uprising

Hungarian campaign of 1527–1528

Battle of Szőlős

Battle of Sződfalva

Battle of Keresztes

Uskok War

Great Turkish War

Siege of Belgrade (1688)

Battle of Batočina

Battle of Niš (1689)

Siege of Belgrade (1690)

Battle of Lugos

Rákóczi's War of Independence

Battle of Saint Gotthard (1705)

Austro-Turkish War (1716–1718)

Siege of Belgrade (1717)

Russo-Turkish War (1735–1739)

Battle of Zsibó

Battle of Trenčín

Battle of Petrovaradin

Battle of Banja Luka

Austro-Turkish War (1788–1791)

Battle of Drežnik (1788)

Battle of Cetingrad (1790)

Ottomans 
Long War (Ottoman wars) (1593–1606)

Banat Uprising (1594)

Serb Uprising of 1596–97

Battle of Mohács (1687)

Uprising in Vučitrn

Serb uprising of 1737–39

Kočina Krajina Serb rebellion

Battle of Martinići (1796)

Battle of Krusi

Battle of Lopate

Venice 
Morean War

Battle of Perast

Cretan War (1645–1669)

Great Turkish War

Battle on Vrtijeljka

Battle of Slankamen

Battle of Senta

Russia 
Serbian Hussar Regiment
Pruth River Campaign

War of the Polish Succession

Russo-Swedish War (1741–1743)

Seven Years' War

19th century

Serbian revolution 
First Serbian Uprising
Vračar

Rudnik

Svileuva

Batočina and Jagodina

Kragujevac

Drlupa

Čokešina

Šabac

Požarevac

Karanovac

Adakale

Ivankovac

Rudnik

Vrbica

Mišar

Deligrad

Belgrade (1806)

Liberation of Belgrade

Loznica

Malajnica and Štubik

Čegar

Jasika

Prahovo

Suvodol

Drina

Varvarin

Loznica

Mačva

Ravnje

Hadži Prodan's Revolt

Second Serbian Uprising
Ljubić

Čačak

Palež

Požarevac

Rudnik

Družetić

Kragujevac

Jagodina

Karanovac

Batočina

Užice

Valjevo

Batočina

Montenegrin-Ottoman 
Montenegrin–Ottoman War (1852–53)

Battle of Grahovac

Battle of Kolašin

Montenegrin–Ottoman War (1861–62)

Montenegrin–Ottoman War (1876–78)

Battle of Vučji Do

Battle of Fundina

Battles for Plav and Gusinje
Velika attacks

Battle of Novšiće

Battle of Murino

Other 
Kumanovo uprising

Adriatic campaign of 1807–1814

Jančić's rebellion

Priest Jovica's Rebellion

Several battles of Hungarian Revolution of 1848

Battle of Vršac (1849)

Serbian-Turkish Wars (1876–1878)
Battle of Vranje

Siege of Cattaro

Herzegovina uprising (1852–62)

Krivošije uprising (1869)

Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)

AU-BiH War
Battle of Jajce (1878)

Battle of Vitez (1878)

Battle of Sarajevo (1878)

Serbo-Bulgarian War
Battle of Pirot

Battle of Slivnitsa

20th century

Macedonian struggle 
Fight on Šuplji Kamen

Fight on Čelopek

Fight in Tabanovce

Fight in Velika Hoča

Fight on Čelopek (1906)

Battle of Pirot (1913)

Balkan Wars 
First Balkan War
Battle of Kumanovo

Battle of Prilep

Battle of Monastir

Siege of Scutari

Siege of Adrianople

Siege of Odrin (1912–13)

Second Balkan War
Battle of Bregalnica

Battle of Kalimanci

Battle of Knjaževac

Siege of Vidin (1913)

Ohrid-Debar Uprising

World War I 
Montenegrin campaign
Battle of Mojkovac

Serbian campaign
Battle of Cer

Battle of the Crna Bend (1916)

Battle of Bazargic

Battle of Dobro Pole

Battle of Drina

Battle of Florina

Battle of Kaymakchalan

Battle of Kolubara

Kosovo Offensive (1915)

Liberation of Serbia, Albania and Montenegro (1918)

Battle of Malka Nidzhe

Macedonian front

Monastir Offensive

Morava Offensive

Ovče Pole Offensive

Vardar Offensive

Srem Offensive

Toplica Uprising

Interwar 
Carinthia War

Uprising in Drenica

Christmas Uprising

Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War

Albanian-Yugoslav Border War (1921)

Drenica-Junik Uprising

World War II 
Invasion of Yugoslavia

Uprising in Serbia (1941)

Uprising in Montenegro (1941)

June 1941 uprising in eastern Herzegovina

Battle for Novi Pazar

Battle of Pljevlja

Battle of Kozara

Battle of Loznica (1941)

Battle of Livno

Battle of Neretva

Battle of the Sutjeska

Raid on Drvar

Battle of Knin

Battle of Mostar

Battle of Lijevče Field

1942 Montenegro offensive

Battle of Batina

Belgrade Offensive

Capture of Banja Koviljača

Case Black

Case White

Operation Draufgänger (Andrijevica)

Kozara Offensive

Battle of Kupres (1942)

Battle of Višegrad

Mostar operation

Nagykanizsa–Körmend Offensive

Niš operation

Battle of Odžak

Capture of Olovo (1941)

Operation Alfa

Operation Delphin

Operation Kopaonik

Operation Kugelblitz

Operation Mihailovic

Operation Southeast Croatia

Operation Trio

Operation Uzice

Battle of Poljana

Operation Prijedor

Siege of Rogatica (1941)

Operation Rösselsprung (1944)

Kosovo Operation (1944)

Operation Spring Awakening

Srb uprising

Stratsin-Kumanovo operation

Syrmian Front

Battle of Zvornik

Battle of Sarajevo (1945)

Battle of Zelengora

Croatian War 
Pakrac clash

Plitvice Lakes incident

Battle of Borovo Selo

Operation Stinger

1991 Yugoslav campaign in Croatia

Battle of Osijek

Battle of Vukovar

Battle of Gospić

Battle of Šibenik

Battle of Zadar

Battle of Kusonje

Battle of the Barracks

Siege of Varaždin Barracks

Siege of Bjelovar Barracks

Battle of the Dalmatian Channels

Siege of Dubrovnik

Operation Otkos 10

Operation Orkan 91

Operation Whirlwind

Operation Baranja

Operation Jackal

Battle of the Miljevci Plateau

Operation Tiger

Operation Maslenica

Operation Medak Pocket

Operation Winter '94

Operation Flash

Operation Summer '95

Operation Storm

Bosnian War 
Battle of Bosanski Brod

Battle of Kupres

Siege of Sarajevo

Siege of Srebrenica

Siege of Goražde

Siege of Doboj

Operation Jackal

Siege of Bihać

Operation Vrbas '92

Operation Corridor 92

Mitrovdan offensive

Kravica attack

Siege of Mostar

Operation Irma

Operation Bøllebank

Operation Tiger

Battle of Kupres

Operation Amanda

Operation Spider

Operation Winter '94

Battle of Vlašić

Operation Leap 1

Battle of Orašje

Operation Leap 2

Operation Summer '95

Battle of Vrbanja Bridge

Battle for Vozuća

Operation Miracle

Operation Mistral 2

Operation Sana

Operation Una

Operation Southern Move

NATO intervention in Bosnia and Herzegovina
1995 Pale air strikes

Operation Deny Flight

Operation Deliberate Force

Operation Maritime Monitor

Kosovo War 
Insurgency in Kosovo

Albanian–Yugoslav border incident (December 1998)

Albania–Yugoslav border incident (April 1999)

April 23, 1998 Albanian–Yugoslav border ambush

Attack on Orahovac

Attack on Prekaz

Battle of Lođa

Battle of Oraovica

Battle of Belaćevac Mine

Battle of Podujevo

December 14, 1998 Albanian–Yugoslav border ambush

Battle of Glodjane

July 18, 1998 Albanian–Yugoslav border clashes

Battle of Junik

Battle of Košare

 Insurgency in the Preševo Valley

Prizren incident (1999)

 NATO bombing of Yugoslavia
Dubrava Prison bombings and executions

1999 F-117A shootdown

21st century

Peacekeeping 
Central African Republic

Cyprus

DR Congo

Ivory Coast

Lebanon

Liberia

Mali

Somalia

Authority control 
LCCN: sh85116068

NKC: ph125315

TDVİA: doksanuc-harbi
