Charvet shirt from the 1930s, Norsk Folkemuseum, Oslo, Norway

A shirt is a cloth garment for the upper body (from the neck to the waist).

Originally an undergarment worn exclusively by men, it has become, in American English, a catch-all term for a broad variety of upper-body garments and undergarments. In British English, a shirt is more specifically a garment with a collar, sleeves with cuffs, and a full vertical opening with buttons or snaps (North Americans would call that a "dress shirt", a specific type of collared shirt). A shirt can also be worn with a necktie under the shirt collar.

Contents

1 History

2 Types

3 Parts of shirt

3.1 Shoulders and arms

3.1.1 Sleeves

3.1.2 Cuffs

3.2 Lower hem

3.3 Body

3.4 Neck

3.5 Other features

4 Measures and sizes

4.1 Sizes

5 Types of fabric

6 Shirts and politics

7 Industrial production

8 See also

9 References

10 External links

History

The world's oldest preserved garment, discovered by Flinders Petrie, is a "highly sophisticated" linen shirt from a First Dynasty Egyptian tomb at Tarkan, dated to c. 3000 BC: "the shoulders and sleeves have been finely pleated to give form-fitting trimness while allowing the wearer room to move. The small fringe formed during weaving along one edge of the cloth has been placed by the designer to decorate the neck opening and side seam."

The shirt was an item of clothing that only men could wear as underwear, until the twentieth century. Although the women's chemise was a closely related garment to the men's, it is the men's garment that became the modern shirt. In the Middle Ages, it was a plain, undyed garment worn next to the skin and under regular garments. In medieval artworks, the shirt is only visible (uncovered) on humble characters, such as shepherds, prisoners, and penitents. In the seventeenth century, men's shirts were allowed to show, with much the same erotic import as visible underwear today. In the eighteenth century, instead of underpants, men "relied on the long tails of shirts ... to serve the function of drawers. Eighteenth-century costume historian Joseph Strutt believed that men who did not wear shirts to bed were indecent. Even as late as 1879, a visible shirt with nothing over it was considered improper.

The shirt sometimes had frills at the neck or cuffs. In the sixteenth century, men's shirts often had embroidery, and sometimes frills or lace at the neck and cuffs and through the eighteenth-century long neck frills, or jabots, were fashionable. Coloured shirts began to appear in the early nineteenth century, as can be seen in the paintings of George Caleb Bingham. They were considered casual wear, for lower-class workers only, until the twentieth century. For a gentleman, "to wear a sky-blue shirt was unthinkable in 1860 but had become standard by 1920 and, in 1980, constituted the most commonplace event."

European and American women began wearing shirts in 1860, when the Garibaldi shirt, a red shirt as worn by the freedom fighters under Giuseppe Garibaldi, was popularized by Empress Eugénie of France. At the end of the nineteenth century, the Century Dictionary described an ordinary shirt as "of cotton, with linen bosom, wristbands and cuffs prepared for stiffening with starch, the collar and wristbands being usually separate and adjustable".

The first documented appearance of the expression "To give the shirt off one's back", happened in 1771 as an idiom that indicates extreme desperation or generosity and is still in common usage. In 1827 Hannah Montague, a housewife in upstate New York, invents the detachable collar. Tired of constantly washing her husband's entire shirt when only the collar needed it, she cut off his collars and devised a way of attaching them to the neckband after washing. It wasn't until the 1930s that collar stays became popular, although these early accessories resembled tie clips more than the small collar stiffeners available today. They connected the collar points to the necktie, keeping them in place 

Types

Three types of shirt

Camp shirt – a loose, straight-cut, short sleeved shirt or blouse with a simple placket front-opening and a "camp collar".

Dress shirt – shirt with a formal (somewhat stiff) collar, a full-length opening at the front from the collar to the hem (usually buttoned), and sleeves with cuffs

White shirt - usually dress shirt which its colour is white
Dinner shirt – a shirt specifically made to be worn with male evening wear, e.g. a black tie or white tie.

Guayabera – an embroidered dress shirt with four pockets.

Poet shirt – a loose-fitting shirt or blouse with full bishop sleeves, usually with large frills on the front and on the cuffs.

T-shirt – also "tee shirt", a casual shirt without a collar or buttons, made of a stretchy, finely knit fabric, usually cotton, and usually short-sleeved. Originally worn under other shirts, it is now a common shirt for everyday wear in some countries.
Long-sleeved T-shirt – a T-shirt with long sleeves that extend to cover the arms.

Ringer T-shirt – tee with a separate piece of fabric sewn on as the collar and sleeve hems

Halfshirt – a high-hemmed T-shirt

Sleeveless shirt – a shirt manufactured without sleeves, or one whose sleeves have been cut off, also called a tank top
A-shirt or vest or singlet (in British English) – essentially a sleeveless shirt with large armholes and a large neck hole, often worn by labourers or athletes for increased movability.

Camisole – woman's undershirt with narrow straps, or a similar garment worn alone (often with bra). Also referred to as a cami, shelf top, spaghetti straps or strappy top

Polo shirt (also tennis shirt or golf shirt) – a pullover soft collar short-sleeved shirt with an abbreviated button placket at the neck and a longer back than front (the "tennis tail").
Rugby shirt – a long-sleeved polo shirt, traditionally of rugged construction in thick cotton or wool, but often softer today

Henley shirt – a collarless polo shirt

Baseball shirt (jersey) – usually distinguished by a three-quarters sleeve, team insignia, and flat waist seam

Sweatshirt – long-sleeved athletic shirt of heavier material, with or without hood

Tunic – primitive shirt, distinguished by two-piece construction. Initially a men's garment, is normally seen in modern times being worn by women

Shirtwaist – historically (circa. 1890–1920) a woman's tailored shirt (also called a "tailored waist") cut like a man's dress shirt; in contemporary usage, a woman's dress cut like a men's dress shirt to the waist, then extended into dress length at the bottom

Nightshirt – often oversized, ruined or inexpensive light cloth undergarment shirt for sleeping.

Halter top – a shoulderless, sleeveless garment for women. It is mechanically analogous to an apron with a string around the back of the neck and across the lower back holding it in place.

Top shirt – a long-sleeved collarless polo shirt

Heavy shirt – a shirt with the heavy size that covers up under the neck

Onesie or diaper shirt – a shirt for infants which includes a long back that is wrapped between the legs and buttoned to the front of the shirt

Tube top (in American English) or boob tube (in British English) – a shoulderless, sleeveless "tube" that wraps the torso not reaching higher than the armpit, staying in place by elasticity or by a single strap that is attached to the front of the tube

Punishment shirts were special shirts made for the condemned, either those cursed supernaturally, such as the poisoned shirt that killed Creusa (daughter of Creon), the Shirt of Nessus used to kill Hercules, those used to execute people in ancient Rome, such as the Tunica molesta, and those used in church heresy trials, such as the Shirt of Flame, or the Sanbenito

Parts of shirt

Many terms are used to describe and differentiate types of shirts (and upper-body garments in general) and their construction. The smallest differences may have significance to a cultural or occupational group. Recently, (late twentieth century, into the twenty-first century) it has become common to use tops as a form of advertisement. Many of these distinctions apply to other upper-body garments, such as coats and sweaters.

Shoulders and arms

Sleeves

Main article: Sleeves

Shirts may:

have no covering of the shoulders or arms – a tube top (not reaching higher than the armpits, staying in place by elasticity)

have only shoulder straps, such as spaghetti straps

cover the shoulders, but without sleeves

have shoulderless sleeves, short or long, with or without shoulder straps, that expose the shoulders, but cover the rest of the arm from the biceps and triceps down to at least the elbow

have short sleeves, varying from cap sleeves (covering only the shoulder and not extending below the armpit) to half sleeves (elbow length), with some having quarter-length sleeves (reaching to a point that covers half of the biceps and triceps area)

have three-quarter-length sleeves (reaching to a point between the elbow and the wrist)

have long sleeves (reaching a point to the wrist to a little beyond wrist)

Cuffs

Main article: Cuff

Shirts with long sleeves may further be distinguished by the cuffs:

no buttons – a closed placket cuff

buttons (or analogous fasteners such as snaps) – single or multiple. A single button or pair aligned parallel with the cuff hem is considered a button cuff. Multiple buttons aligned perpendicular to the cuff hem, or parallel to the placket constitute a barrel cuff.

buttonholes designed for cufflinks
a French cuff, where the end half of the cuff is folded over the cuff itself and fastened with a cufflink. This type of cuff has four buttons and a short placket.

more formally, a link cuff – fastened like a French cuff, except is not folded over, but instead hemmed, at the edge of the sleeve.

asymmetrical designs, such as one-shoulder, one-sleeve or with sleeves of different lengths.

Lower hem

hanging to the waist

leaving the belly button area bare (much more common for women than for men). See halfshirt.

covering the crotch

covering part of the legs (essentially this is a dress; however, a piece of clothing is perceived either as a shirt (worn with trousers) or as a dress (in Western culture mainly worn by women)).

going to the floor (as a pajama shirt)

Body

vertical opening on the front side, all the way down, with buttons or zipper. When fastened with buttons, this opening is often called the placket front.

similar opening, but in back.

left and right front side not separable, put on over the head; with regard to upper front side opening:
V-shaped permanent opening on the top of the front side

no opening at the upper front side

vertical opening on the upper front side with buttons or zipper
men's shirts are often buttoned on the right whereas women's are often buttoned on the left.

Neck

with polo-neck

with "scoop" neck

with v-neck but no collar

with plunging neck

with open or tassel neck

with collar
windsor collar or spread collar – a dressier collar designed with a wide distance between points (the spread) to accommodate the windsor knot tie. The standard business collar.

tab collar – a collar with two small fabric tabs that fasten together behind a tie to maintain collar spread.

wing collar – best suited for the bow tie, often only worn for very formal occasions.

straight collar – or point collar, a version of the windsor collar that is distinguished by a narrower spread to better accommodate the four-in-hand knot, pratt knot, and the half-windsor knot. A moderate dress collar.

button-down collar – A collar with buttons that fasten the points or tips to a shirt. The most casual of collars worn with a tie.

band collar – essentially the lower part of a normal collar, first used as the original collar to which a separate collarpiece was attached. Rarely seen in modern fashion. Also casual.

turtle neck collar – A collar that covers most of the throat.

without collar
V-neck no collar – The neckline protrudes down the chest and to a point, creating a "V"-looking neckline.

Other features

pockets – how many (if any), where, and with regard to closure: not closable, just a flap, or with a button or zipper.

with or without hood

Some combinations are not applicable, e.g. a tube top cannot have a collar.

Measures and sizes

The main measures for a jacket are:

Shoulders

Bust

Waist

Hip

Sleeve

Length, from the neck to the waist or hip.

Sizes

Asia Size M = US/EU Size XS.

Asia Size L = US/EU Size S.

Asia Size XL = US/EU Size M.

Asia Size XXL = US/EU Size L.

Asia Size XXXL = US/EU Size XL.

Asia Size XXXXL = US/EU Size XXL.

Types of fabric

There are two main categories of fibres used: natural fibre and man-made fibre (synthetics or petroleum based). Some natural fibres are linen, the first used historically, hemp, cotton, the most used, ramie, wool, silk and more recently bamboo or soya. Some synthetic fibres are polyester, tencel, viscose, etc. Polyester mixed with cotton (poly-cotton) is often used. Fabrics for shirts are called shirtings. The four main weaves for shirtings are plain weave, oxford, twill and satin. Broadcloth, poplin and end-on-end are variations of the plain weave. After weaving, finishing can be applied to the fabric.

Shirts and politics

See also: Political colour

In the 1920s and 1930s, fascists wore different coloured shirts:

Black shirts were used by the Italian fascists, and in Britain, Finland and Germany and Croatia. The party leaders of Dravidar Kazhagam in India wear only black shirts to symbolise atheism.

Brownshirts were worn by German Nazis of the SA.

The Blueshirts was a fascist movement in Ireland and Canada, and the colour of the Portuguese Nacional Sindicalistas, the Spanish Falange Española, the French Solidarité Française, and the Chinese Blue Shirts Society.

Green shirts were used in Hungary, Ireland, Romania, Brazil and Portugal.

Camisas Doradas (golden shirts) were used in Mexico.

Red shirts were worn by the racist and antisemitic Bulgarian Ratniks.

Silver Shirts were worn in the United States of America.

Grey shirts were worn by members of the Fatherland League in Norway.

In addition, red shirts have been used to symbolize a variety of different political groups, including Garibaldi's Italian revolutionaries, nineteenth-century American street gangs, and socialist militias in Spain and Mexico during the 1930s.

Different colored shirts signified the major opposing sides that featured prominently in the 2008 Thai political crisis, with red having been worn by the supporters of the populist People's Power Party (PPP), and yellow being worn by the supporters of the royalist and anti-Thaksin Shinawatra movement the People's Alliance for Democracy (PAD). Each side is commonly referred to as the 'red shirts' and 'yellow shirts' respectively, though the later opponents of the later Thaksin supporting groups have largely ceased wearing yellow shirts to protest rallies.

In the UK, the Social Credit movement of the thirties wore green shirts.

Industrial production

\t\t
\t\t\t

\t\t\t
Shirt production line

\t\t\t

\t\t

\t\t
\t\t\t

\t\t\t
Factory sewing

\t\t\t

\t\t

\t\t
\t\t\t

\t\t\t
Shirts on a conveyor

\t\t\t

\t\t

\t\t
\t\t\t

\t\t\t
Shirts awaiting finishing

\t\t\t

\t\t

\t\t
\t\t\t

\t\t\t
Kids shirts for quality checking

\t\t\t

\t\t

\t\t
\t\t\t

\t\t\t
Manufacturer and buyer reviewing product

\t\t\t

\t\t

\t\t
\t\t\t

\t\t\t
Dress shirt

\t\t\t

\t\t

See also

Cardigan (sweater)

Descamisado

Jermyn Street, home of the oldest English shirtmakers

References

^ Barber, Elizabeth Wayland (1994). Women's Work. The first 20,000 Years, p.135.Norton & Company, New York. ISBN 0-393-31348-4

^ a b William L. Brown III, "Some Thoughts on Men's Shirts in America, 1750-1900", Thomas Publications, Gettysburg, PA 1999. ISBN 1-57747-048-6, p. 7

^ Dorothy K. Burnham, "Cut My Cote", Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto, Ontario 1973. ISBN 0-88854-046-9, p. 14

^ C. Willett Cunnington and Phillis Cunnington, The History of Underclothes, Dover Publications Inc., New York 1992. ISBN 0-486-27124-2 pp. 23–25

^ C. Willett and Phillis Cunnington, The History of Underclothes, Dover Publications Inc., New York 1992. ISBN 0-486-27124-2 pp. 54

^ Linda Baumgarten, "What Clothes Reveal: The Language of Clothing in Colonial and Federal America", The Colonial Williamsburg Foundation, Williamsburg, Virginia, in association with the Yale University Press, New Haven, Connecticut 2002, ISBN 0-300-09580-5, p. 27

^ Linda Baumgarten, "What Clothes Reveal: The Language of Clothing in Colonial and Federal America", The Colonial Williamsburg Foundation, Williamsburg, Virginia, in association with the Yale University Press, New Haven, Connecticut 2002, ISBN 0-300-09580-5, pp. 20-22

^ C. Willet and Phillis Cunnington, "The History of Underclothes", Dover Publications Inc., New York 1992. ISBN 0-486-27124-2 pp. 36–39

^ C. Willet and Phillis Cunnington, "The History of Underclothes", Dover Publications Inc., New York 1992. ISBN 0-486-27124-2 pp. 73

^ Michel Pastoureau and Jody Gladding (translator), "The Devil's Cloth: A History of Stripes", Columbia University Press, New York 2001 ISBN 0-7434-5326-3, p. 65

^ Anne Buck, "Victorian Costume", Ruth Bean Publishers, Carlton, Bedford, England 1984. ISBN 0-903585-17-0

^ Young, Julia Ditto, "The Rise of the Shirt Waist", Good Housekeeping, May 1902, pp. 354–357

^ "History Of The Shirt :: Shirt Guide". Gant US. Retrieved 2016-09-29.

^ For example, see Laura I. Baldt, A.M., Clothing for Women: Selection, Design and Construction, J.B. Lippincott Company, Philadelphia, PA 1924 (second edition), p. 312

External links

 Look up shirt in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Shirts.

"Introduction to 18th-century fashion". Fashion, Jewellery & Accessories. Victoria and Albert Museum.

"Introduction to 19th-century fashion". Fashion, Jewellery & Accessories. Victoria and Albert Museum.

v

t

e

Clothing

Headwear 
Beret

Cap
Baseball

Flat

Knit

Hat
Boater

Bowler

Fedora

Homburg

Top

Helmet

Hood

Kerchief

Turban

Veil

Neckwear 
Bands

Choker

Clerical collar

Cravat

Neckerchief

Necktie
Ascot

Bolo

Bow

Club
School

Stock

Scarf

Tops 
Blouse
Cache-cœur

Crop top

Halterneck

Tube top

Shirt
Dress

Henley

Polo

Sleeveless

T

Sweater
Cardigan

Guernsey

Hoodie

Jersey

Polo neck

Shrug

Sweater vest

Twinset

Waistcoat

Trousers 
Bell-bottoms

Bondage

Capri

Cargo

Chaps

Formal

High water

Lowrise

Jeans

Jodhpurs

Overalls

Palazzo

Parachute

Pedal pushers

Phat

Shorts
Bermuda

Cycling

Dolphin

Gym

Hotpants

Running

Slim-fit

Sweatpants

Windpants

Yoga pants

Suits and

uniforms 
Ceremonial dress
Academic

Court

Diplomatic

Folk

Jumpsuit

Military
Full

Mess

Service
Sailor

Combat

Pantsuit

Religious
Cassock

Clerical

Vestment

School
Gymslip

Prison

Workwear
Boilersuit

Cleanroom

Hazmat

Space

Scrubs

Dresses

and gowns

Formal, semi-

formal, informal 
Backless

Bouffant gown

Coatdress

Cocktail
Little black

Coronation

Evening
Ball gown

Debutante

Princess line

Strapless

Wedding

Wrap

Casual 
Frock

House

Jumper

Romper suit

Sheath

Shirtdress

Slip

Sundress

Skirts 
A-line

Ballerina

Denim

Men's

Miniskirt

Pencil

Prairie

Rah-rah

Sarong

Skort

Tutu

Wrap

Underwear

and lingerie

Top 
Bra

Camisole

Undershirt

Bottom 
Diaper

Leggings

Panties

Plastic pants

Slip

Thong

Underpants
Boxer briefs

Boxer shorts

Midway briefs

Briefs

Full 
Adult bodysuit (Playsuit)

Infant bodysuit

Long underwear

See-through

Teddy

Coats

and

outerwear

Overcoats 
Car

Chesterfield

Covert

Duffel

Duster

Greatcoat
British Warm

Guards Coat

Greca

Over-frock

Riding
Shadbelly

Trench

Ulster

Cloak
Opera

Paletot

Pea

Polo

Raincoat
Mackintosh

Suit coats 
Frock coat
Bekishe

Rekel

Mess jacket

Suit jacket
Blazer

Smoking

Sports

Teba

Tailcoat
Dress

Morning

Other 
Apron
Pinafore

Blouson

Cagoule

Cape
Ferraiolo

Inverness

Mantle, Monastic

Mantle, Royal

Mozzetta

Pellegrina

Coatee

Cut-off

Gilet

Jacket
Flight

Goggle

Harrington

Leather

Norfolk

Safari

Jerkin

Lab coat

Parka

Poncho

Robe
Bathrobe

Dressing gown

Shawl

Ski suit

Sleeved blanket

Windbreaker

Nightwear 
Babydoll

Babygrow

Blanket sleeper

Negligee

Nightgown

Nightshirt

Pajamas

Swimwear 
Bikini

Burkini

Boardshorts

Dry suit

Monokini

One-piece

Rash guard

Sling

Square leg suit

Swim briefs

Swim diaper

Trunks

Wetsuit

Footwear 
Boot

Court shoe

Dress boot

Dress shoe

Flip-flops

Hosiery

Sandal

Shoe

Spats

Slipper

Sneakers

Sock

Stocking

Tights

Accessories 
Belt

Boutonnière

Coin purse

Cufflink

Cummerbund

Gaiters

Glasses

Opera gloves

Headband

Handbag

Jewellery

Livery

Muff

Pocket protector

Pocket watch

Sash

Sunglasses

Suspenders

Umbrella

Wallet

Watch

Dress codes

Western 
Formal
Morning dress

White tie

Semi-formal
Black lounge suit

Black tie

Informal

Casual

Related 
Clothing fetish

Cross-dressing

Fashion
Haute couture

Made-to-measure

Ready-to-wear

Laws

Terminology

Clothing portal
