This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Shyama Shastri" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (July 2013) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Shyama Shastri

Born Venkata Subrahmanya

(1762-04-26)26 April 1762

Thiruvarur, Thanjavur Maratha kingdom

Died 1827

Other names Shyama Krishna

Occupation Carnatic music composer

Carnatic music

Tanjavur-style Tambura

Concepts

Śruti

Svara

Rāga

Tāḷa

Mēḷakarta

Asaṃpūrṇa Mēḷakarta

Compositions

Gītaṃ

Svarajati

Varṇaṃ

Kriti

Kirtana

Rāgaṃ Tānaṃ Pallavi

Tillana

Instruments

Melody

Sarasvati Vīṇa

Veṇu

Nāgasvaraṃ

Gottuvadhyam (Citra Vīṇa)

Violin

Percussion

Mr̥daṅgaṃ

Ghatam

Morsing

Kanjira

Thavil

Drone

Tambura

Shruti box

Composers

Glossary

v

t

e

Shyama Shastri (IAST: Śyāma Śāstri; 26 April 1762 – 1827) or Syama Sastri was a musician and composer of Carnatic music. He was the oldest among the Trinity of Carnatic music, Tyagaraja and Muthuswami Dikshitar being the other two.

Contents

1 Early life and career

2 Death and legacy

3 Compositions

3.1 Svara Jati

3.2 Kriti

4 See also

5 Notes

6 References

7 Sources

8 External links

Early life and career

Shyama Shastri was born on 26 April 1762 in a Brahmin family in Tiruvarur in what is now the state of Tamil Nadu. He received his instruction in the vedas, astrology, and other traditional subjects early on and learned music from his maternal uncle. He was later trained in music by Adiappayya, a noted durbar musician of Thanjavur.

Although Śyāma Śastri did not compose as so many kritis as his two prolific contemporaries, his compositions are still well known due to the literary, melodic and rhythmic proficiency observed in them. It is said that he composed about three hundred pieces in all.

He did not have many disciples to propagate his compositions, nor was the printing press widely accessible during his time. More importantly, the scholarly nature of his compositions made them more appealing to the learned than to the lay. His compositions are far fewer in number than Tyagaraja or Dikshita. Additionally, they feature a more formal form of Telugu which borrows heavily from Sanskrit. In contrast, Tyagaraja composes in this form of Telugu but also resorts to a more colloquial dialect to which Shyama Shastri does not.

There are also a number of krithis in Tamil attributed to him. Most of his compositions propitiate the goddess Kamakshi.

He composed kritis, varṇa(s) and svarajati(s) with the ankita or mudra (signature) Śyāma Krishna. He was probably the first to compose in a new form of the svarajati musical genre, where the compositions could be rendered solely in a singing or instrumental manner. Prior to this, the svarajati was primarily a dance form, and was close in structure to the dance Varṇaṃ (padavarṇaṃ).

His set of three famous svarajati(s) are intended to be sung in concert rather than danced, and are sometimes referred to as "Ratnatrayam" (Three jewels). They are Kāmākṣhī Anudinamu, Kāmākṣhī Padayugamē, and Rāvē himagiri kumāri, composed in the ragas Bhairavi, Yadukula kambhoji and Todi respectively. The former two are set to Miśra Cāpu Tāḷa, while the third is set to Ādi Tāḷa.

He was known for his ability to compose in the most complex of tāḷas. He was also widely revered for his voice and singing ability during his time.

Death and legacy

Shyama Shastri died in Thanjavur in 1827. He had two sons, Panju Shastri and Subbaraya Shastri. Panju was a devoted worshipper of the deity, Bangaru Kamakshi. Subbaraya was trained in music by his father and became a gifted composer as well as a noted player of the veena. At his father's behest, he was also trained by Tyagaraja, Shyama Shastri's renowned contemporary. Shyama Shastri's adopted grandson, Annasvami Shastri (1827–1900), was also a fine composer.

Shastri had a number of disciples who excelled at the art. Alasur Krishna Iyer became a musician at the royal durbar in Mysore. Porambur Krishna Iyer popularised many of his guru's works. Another disciple, Talagambadi Panchanada Iyer also made his mark as a composer. Another disciple named Dasari gained fame as a noted nāgaswaram player.

Compositions

The below sections mention some of his compositions.

Svara Jati

CompositionRagaTāḷaLanguageDescription

Kāmākṣhī anudinamu maruvakanē

కామాక్షీ అనుదినము మరువకనే Bhairavi Miśra Cāpu Telugu 

Kāmākṣhī padayugame sthiramaninē

Yadukulakamboji Miśra Cāpu Telugu 

Rāvē himagiri kumāri

రావే హిమగిరి కుమారీ Todi Ādi Telugu 

Kriti

CompositionRagaTāḷaLanguageDescription

Śaṅkari Śaṃkuru candra mukhī

Sanskrit: शङ्करि शंकुरु चन्द्र मुखी

Telugu Script: శఙ్కరి శంకురు చన్ద్ర ముఖీ Sāvēri Ādi – Tiśra Gati Sanskrit 

pAlayAshu mAM paradEvatE Arabhi Sanskrit 

kanaka śaila vihāriṇī

Sanskrit: कनक शैल विहारिणी

Telugu Script: కనక శైల విహారిణీ Punnāga Varāḷi Ādi Sanskrit 

Birāna varālicci brōvave

బిరాన వరాలిచ్చి బ్రోవవె Kaḷyāṇi Ādi – Tiśra Gati Telugu 

Dēvī brōva samayamu

దేవీ బ్రోవ సమయము Cintāmaṇi Telugu 

kAmAkSi lOka sAkSiNi madhyamAvati Sanskrit 

Himādri sutē pāhimāṃ

హిమాద్రి సుతే పాహిమాం Kaḷyāṇi Ādi Sanskrit 

Māyammā yani nē pilacite

మాయమ్మా యని నే పిలచితె Ahiri Ādi Telugu 

Mari vērē gati evvarammā

మరి వేరే గతి ఎవరమ్మా Anandabhairavi Miśra Cāpu Telugu 

Nannu brōvu lalitā

నన్ను బ్రోవు లలితా Lalita Miśra Cāpu Telugu 

O jagadambā nannu

ఓ జగదమ్బా నన్ను Anandabhairavi Ādi Telugu 

Pārvati ninu nē nera nammiti

పార్వతీ నిను నే నెర నమ్మితి kalkaḍa Telugu 

Sarōja daḷa nētri himagiri putrī

సరోజ దళ నేత్రి హిమగిరి పుత్రీ śaṃkarābharaṇaṃ Ādi Telugu 

Tallī ninnu nera namminānu vinavē

తల్లీ నిన్ను నెర నమ్మినాను వినవే Kaḷyāṇi Miśra Cāpu Telugu 

Pāhi Srī Girirājasutē Karuṇākalitē Anandabhairavī Rūpakaṃ Telugu-Sanskrit 

Devī Mīna Nētrī Brōva Shankarabharanam Adi Telugu 

Ennēramum un Nāmam

என்னேரமும் உன் நாமம் Pūrvikalyāni Misra caapu Tamil 

Ennēramum un Pāda Kamalam

என்னேரமும் உன் பாத கமலம் Punnāgavarāḷi Miśra Cāpu Tamil 

See also

India portal

Music portal

List of Carnatic composers

Notes

^ Some sources state that his family was Telugu while others claim that they were Tamil.

References

^ "Thiruvaiyaru Thyagaraja Aradhana". Archived from the original on 14 January 2016. Retrieved 15 November 2015.

^ P. Sambamoorthy (1962). Great Composers. Indian Music Publishing House. pp. 69–94.

^ a b Fuller & Narasimhan 2014, p. 201.

^ a b c d OEMI:SS.

^ Madan Gopal (1990). K.S. Gautam (ed.). India through the ages. Publication Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India. p. 231.

Sources

"Śyāma Śāstri". The Oxford Encyclopaedia of the Music of India. Oxford University Press. 2011. ISBN 9780195650983. Retrieved 20 September 2018.

Fuller, C. J.; Narasimhan, Haripriya (11 November 2014). Tamil Brahmans: The Making of a Middle-Class Caste. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-15288-2.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

External links

Compositions of Shyama Shastri

Authority control 
BNF: cb139834834 (data)

GND: 139232397

ISNI: 0000 0000 8142 6089

LCCN: n89105469

MusicBrainz: 93687aef-82c6-4f78-959d-1631f1d5e73c

NTA: 301208409

SNAC: w68p6r85

SUDOC: 116485531

VIAF: 63133724

 WorldCat Identities: lccn-n89105469
