"Erotic still photography or film that is less sexually explicit than hardcore pornography

1880s French postcard showing (presumed) intercourse without showing actual penetration.

2010. Still from an erotic art film showing a couple from the waist up, thus leaving ambiguous to what degree sexual activity is occurring, a typical framing technique for a softcore porn film.

Softcore pornography or softcore porn is commercial still photography or film that has a pornographic or erotic component but is less sexually graphic and intrusive than hardcore pornography, defined by a "lack of penetration" including stripteases, lingerie modeling, simulated sex, and emphasis on the sensual appreciation of the female or male form. It typically contains nude or semi-nude actors involved in love scenes, and is intended to be sexually arousing and aesthetically beautiful.

Contents

1 Components

2 Regulation and censorship

3 History

4 See also

5 References

Components

Softcore pornography may include sexual activity between two people or masturbation. It does not contain explicit depictions of sexual intercourse. Depictions of erections of the penis may not be allowed (see Mull of Kintyre Test), although attitudes towards this are ever-changing. Commercial pornography can be differentiated from erotica, which has high-art aspirations.

Portions of images that are considered too explicit may be obscured in a variety of ways, such as the use of draped hair or clothing, carefully positioned hands or other body parts, carefully positioned foreground elements in the scene (often plants, pillows, furniture or drapery), and carefully chosen camera angles.

Pornographic filmmakers sometimes make both hardcore and softcore versions of a film, with the softcore version using less explicit angles of sex scenes, or using the other techniques to "tone down" any objectionable feature. The softcore version may, for example, be edited for the in-house hotel pay-per-view market. French actress Sylvia Krystel acted on softcore film "Emmanuelle"(1974).

Total nudity is commonplace in several magazines, as well as in photography and on the internet.

Regulation and censorship

In most countries softcore films are eligible for movie ratings, usually on a restricted rating, though many such films are also released unrated. As with hardcore films, availability of softcore films varies depending on local laws. Also, the exhibition of such films may be restricted to those above a certain age, typically 18. At least one country, Germany, has different age limits for hardcore and softcore pornography, softcore material usually receiving a FSK-16 rating (no one under 16 allowed to buy) and hardcore material receiving a FSK-18 (no one under 18 allowed to buy). In some countries, broadcasting of softcore films is widespread on cable television networks, with some such as Cinemax producing their own in-house softcore films and television series.

In some countries, images of women's genitals are digitally manipulated so that they aren't too "detailed". An Australian pornographic actress says that images of her own genitals sold to pornographic magazines in different countries are digitally manipulated to change the size and shape of the labia according to censorship standards in different countries.

History

Originally, softcore pornography was presented mainly in the form of "men's magazines", when it was barely acceptable to show a glimpse of a woman's nipple in the 1950s. By the 1970s, in such mainstream magazines as Playboy, Penthouse, and Hustler, no region of the body was considered off limits.

After the formation of the MPAA rating system in the United States and prior to the 1980s, numerous softcore films, with a wide range of production costs, were released to mainstream movie theatres, especially drive-ins. Italian actress Laura Antonelli acted on softcore film "Malizia"(1973). Some, such as Emmanuelle and Alice in Wonderland, received positive reviews from noted critics such as Roger Ebert.

From the 2000s, relaxed standards for cable television has allowed for the production of a number of television series with sexually explicit or violent content to air that would have been restricted to the softcore movie market in the past.

See also

Erotica and pornography portal

Erotic photography

Sexploitation film

References

^ Carroll JL (2018). Sexuality Now: Embracing Diversity. Cengage Learning. p. 289. ISBN 978-1337672061. Vaginal intercourse (also referred to as sexual intercourse) involves inserting

^ Dubberley, Emily (2005). Carly Milne (ed.). Naked Ambition: Women Who Are Changing Pornography. Carroll & Graf Publishers. ISBN 0-7867-1590-1. OCLC 62177941.

^ "Pornography". Encarta. Archived from the original on February 18, 2009.

^ Amis, Martin (March 17, 2001). "A rough trade". guardian.co.uk. Retrieved April 10, 2009.

^ a b "P20th Century Nudes in Art". The Art History Archive. Retrieved July 19, 2009.

^ Battista, Kathy (2011). "Cindy Hinant's make-up, glamour and TV show". Phaidon. Retrieved November 23, 2014. Similarly, Softcore are pornographic images obscured to the point of obliteration, give the appearance of grey monochromes. The sexually charged imagery only emerges in feint detail within intimate distance.

^ The Labiaplasty Fad? - Sex. Hungry Beast. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. April 15, 2010.

^ KATY MARRINER. "The Vagina Diaries - a study guide" (PDF). Australian Teachers of Media magazine. ISBN 978-1-74295-374-8.

^ "Labiaplasty and Censorship - is there a link?". Mamamia.

^ "BLAME IT ON THE BRAZILIAN". BIRDEE.

^ "Samperi Salvatore: Malice (Malizia)". Retrieved May 26, 2020.

^ Ebert, Roger (January 1, 1975). "Emmanuelle". Chicago Sun-Times. Retrieved March 18, 2008.

^ Ebert, Roger (November 24, 1976). "Alice in Wonderland". Chicago Sun-Times. Retrieved March 18, 2008.

v

t

e

Pornography

Pornography

Types 
Amateur

Cartoon
Hentai

Tijuana bible

Child
Erotica

Simulated

Deepfake

Feminist

Hardcore

Internet

Mobile

Phone sex

Revenge

Sexting

Softcore

Genres 
Alt

Bisexual

Bondage

Casting couch

Celebrity
Celebrity sex tape

Clothed female, naked male

Clothed male, naked female

Convent

Ethnic

Gang bang

Gay

Gonzo

Incest

Lesbian erotica

Mormon

Queer

Rape

Reality

Tentacle erotica

Transsexual

Women's

Related 
History of erotic depictions

Pornographic film actor

Organizations 
Adult Film Association of America

Critics Adult Film Association

Fans of X-Rated Entertainment

Free Speech Coalition

X-Rated Critics Organization

List of pornography companies

List of pornographic film studios

Opposition to

pornography

Movements 
Anti-pornography movement in the United Kingdom

Anti-pornography movement in the United States

Antipornography Civil Rights Ordinance

Organizations 
Churchmen's Committee for Decent Publications

Feminists Fighting Pornography

Fight the New Drug

The Marriage Vow

No More Page 3

Stop Bild Sexism

Stop Child Trafficking Now

Stop Porn Culture

Women Against Pornography

Women Against Violence in Pornography and Media

XXXchurch.com

Overuse 
NoFap

Content-control software

Accountability software

Parental controls

Employee monitoring software

Views 
Feminist

Religious

Media 
Audio

Pornographic film
Parody

Cartoon

Magazines
List

Video games
Eroge

Newspaper features
Page 3

Possible effects 
Addiction
Internet sex addiction

Pornography addiction

Sex addiction

Objectification of women / sexism

STDs in the porn industry

People 
Performers by decade

British performers

Gay male performers

Pornographic actors who appeared in mainstream films

Mainstream actors who have appeared in pornographic films

Film directors

Events 
Adultcon

AVN Adult Entertainment Expo

Barcelona International Erotic Film Festival

Brussels International Festival of Eroticism

Exotic Erotic Ball

Exxxotica Expo

HUMP

Porn Sunday

Miscellaneous 
Adult movie theater

Blue Movie

Golden Age of Porn

Not safe for work

Pornographication

Pornotopia

R18 certificate

Rule 34

Sex shop

Sexualization

X rating

See also 
Erotica
Art

Comics

Film

Literature

Photography

Ribaldry

 Category

 Portal

v

t

e

Nudity

Naturism 
Christian naturism

Freikörperkultur

Gay naturism

Gymnosophy

Naturist magazines

Naturist resort

Anarchist naturism

Nude recreation 
Nude beach

Naked restaurant

Nudity in sport

Clothing-optional bike ride

Naked hiking

Nude swimming

Streaking

Naked yoga

Public bathing

Sauna

Massage

Naked party

Nude wedding

Nude beaches

Clothing-optional events

Depictions of nudity 
Nude (art)

Body painting

Naked News

Nude modeling (art)

Nudity in film

Nude photography

Nude photography (art)

Glamour photography

Nudity in American television

Nudity in music videos

Nudity in advertising

Nude calendar

Nudity and sexuality 
Intimate part

Exhibitionism

Voyeurism

Anasyrma

Candaulism

Mooning

Striptease

Stripper
feminist stripper

Softcore pornography

Erotic photography

Sexual objectification

Clothed female, naked male

Clothed male, naked female

Issues in social nudity 
Indecent exposure

Obscenity

Toplessness

Topfreedom

Wardrobe malfunction

Nudity and protest

Sex segregation

Breastfeeding in public

Dress code

Clothing laws by country

Modesty

Nudity in religion

Awrah

Strip search

Undress code

Barefoot

By location 
Africa

Asia

Europe

North America

Oceania

South America

Social nudity advocates 
Kurt Barthel

Lee Baxandall

Paul Bindrim

Ilsley Boone

Henry S. Huntington

Heinrich Pudor

Elton Raymond Shaw

Richard Ungewitter

See also 
History of nudity

Timeline of non-sexual social nudity

Nudity in combat

Nudity clause

Imagery of nude celebrities

Social nudity organizations
