Main entrance to the Shilin Stone Forest

The Stone Forest or Shilin (Chinese: 石林; pinyin: Shílín) is a notable set of limestone formations about 500 km2 located in Shilin Yi Autonomous County, Yunnan Province, People's Republic of China, near Shilin approximately 90 km (56 mi) from the provincial capital Kunming.

The tall rocks seem to arise from the ground in a manner somewhat reminiscent of stalagmites, or with many looking like petrified trees, thereby creating the illusion of a forest made of stone. Since 2007, two parts of the site, the Naigu Stone Forest (乃古石林) and Suogeyi Village (所各邑村), have been UNESCO World Heritage Sites as part of the South China Karst. The site is classified as a AAAAA-class tourist site.

Contents

1 Features

2 Culture

3 Transportation

4 Geology

5 Flora

6 Other plant species

7 See also

8 References

9 Further reading

10 External links

Features

Shilin

Shilin National Scenic Area (昆明市石林风景区) covers an area of 400 km2 (150 sq mi) and is divided into seven scenic areas as follows:

Greater & Lesser Stone Forests (大小石林) - also known as the Lizijing Stone Forest (李子菁石林)

Naigu Stone Forest (乃古石林)

Zhiyun Cave (芝云洞)

Lake Chang (长湖 literally Long Lake)

Lake Yue (月湖 literally Moon Lake)

Dadieshui Waterfall (大叠水瀑布)

Qifeng Cave (奇峰洞)

These formations, caused by the erosion of limestone, are believed to be over 270 million years old and are a tourist attraction for both overseas and domestic tourists, with bus tours bringing tourists from Kunming. There are also a number of hotels in the area.

Culture

According to legend, the forest is the birthplace of Ashima (阿诗玛), a beautiful girl of the Yi people. After falling in love she was forbidden to marry her chosen suitor and instead turned into a stone in the forest that still bears her name.
Each year on the 24th day of the sixth lunar month, many Yi people celebrate the Torch Festival (火把节 Huǒbă Jié), which features folk dances and wrestling competitions.

Transportation

There are buses available from Kunming East Bus Station to the scenic site of Stone Forest, taking about 1.5 hours to get there. Trains are also available from Kunming Train Station to Shilin Train Station, about 2 hours' train ride or 20 minutes by high speed train.

Geology

The Stone Forest area was a shallow sea some 270 million years ago. Extensive deposits of sandstone overlain by limestone accumulated in this basin during the Permian period of geologic time. Uplift of this region occurred subsequent to deposition. Later, exposure to wind and running water shaped these limestone pillars. These formations extend as far as the eye can see, looking like a vast forest of stone, hence the name "The Stone Forest". The Major and Minor Stone Forests are developed in the nearly pure limestone of the Permian Makou Formation. The Naigu Stone Forest, 9 km northeast of the Major Stone Forest, is developed in dolomite and dolomitic limestone of the Permian Qixia Formation. Both formations are of Lower Permian age. They aggregate 505m in thickness and consist of shallow water (platform) massive limestone and dolomite, bio-clastic limestone, calcarenite and calcilutite. The Maokou Formation at Stone Forest appears to have been heavily altered diagenetically, and macroscopic fossil remains are seldom seen. Under the microscope, single whole or fractured fusulinid foraminifera are seen, commonly in biomicrite, biopelmicrite to biopelmicrosparite limestones. At least one zone of chert nodules occurs in the limestone, Unlike in the dolomitic Qixia Formation, dolomite in the Maokou Formation seldom ranges above 3%.

The strata are part of a gentle (2-6 degrees) westward dipping monocline. Conjugate shear joints (NE-SW and NE-SE) are well developed and these fractures provided the main passageways for surface water and underground water in the pre-karst development stage. The distribution, density and orientation of the fractures controlled the depth, size and orientation of the karst topography. Sandstones and shales of the Liangshan Formation that lies below the carbonate rock formations serve as a permeability barrier and force the local groundwater to flow from west to east.

Flora

The Shilin Karst area has the following types of forests and plant communities.

Evergreen broad-leaved forest: Cyclobanopsis glancoides, Cyclobalanopsis delavayi, and Castanopsis delavayi

Sclerophyllous evergreen broad-leaved forests: Quercus cocciferoides and Quercus franchetii

Deciduous broad-leaved and subtropical needle-leaved forests: Pinus yunnanensis

Lake vegetation: Ottelia acuminata

Other plant species

Sino-Himalayan subregion species: Colquhounia, Corallodiscus, Docynia, Lysiontus, Physospermopsis, Prinsepia, Sinocrassula, Siphonostegia

Sino-Japan forest subrealm species: Akebia, Conandron, Sinomenium, Platycladus

East Asian Realm species: Ainsliaea, Bletilla, Codonopsis, Dendrobenthamia, Eriobotrya, Leptodermis, Lycoris, Ophiopogon, Patrinia, Reineckea

See also

Xingwen World Geological Park (nicknamed 'Stone sea')

Earth forest

Petrified Forest

South China Karst

Tsingy

References

^ "Twenty-two new sites inscribed on UNESCO's World Heritage List, and one deleted during Committee meeting in Christchurch". UNESCO World Heritage Convention. June 29, 2007. Retrieved February 17, 2011.

^ Chris Ryan, Gu Huimin and Fang Meng (2009). "Destination planning in China". In Chris Ryan and Gu Huimin (ed.). Tourism in China: Destination, Cultures and Communities (1 ed.). pp. 11–37. ISBN 9780203886366.

^ Stone Forest from travelchinayunnan.com Archived 2007-11-22 at the Wayback Machine

^ "The legend of Ashima (阿诗玛的传说)" (in Chinese). Yunnan Provincial Government Website. April 26, 2005. Archived from the original on April 12, 2006. Retrieved February 17, 2011.

^ "The Stone Forest" ChinaTour.net Accessed 2014-5-22

^ http://www.uh.edu/~jbutler/kunming/stoneforest.html

^ UNESCO: South China Karst

Further reading

A Virtual Field Trip to the Stone Forest, Kunming, Yunnan Province, China

Zhang,S.,1997. Stone forest in China and pinnacle karst in Madagascar. In: Song,L. et al.(eds.) Stone Forest, a Treasure of Natural Heritage. China Environmental Science Press , Beijing.

External links

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Shilin (Stone Forest).

Global Network of National Geoparks: Stone Forest Geopark (Shilin Geopark)

Travelchinayunnan.com: Shilin Stone Forest Geopark webpage

v

t

e

County-level divisions of Yunnan Province

Kunming (capital)

Prefecture-level cities

Kunming 
Panlong District

Wuhua District

Guandu District

Xishan District

Chenggong District

Dongchuan District

Jinning District

Anning city

Fumin County

Yiliang County

Songming County

Shilin County

Luquan County

Xundian County

Qujing 
Qilin District

Zhanyi District

Malong District

Xuanwei city

Fuyuan County

Luoping County

Shizong County

Luliang County

Huize County

Yuxi 
Hongta District

Jiangchuan District

Chengjiang city

Tonghai County

Huaning County

Yimen County

Eshan County

Xinping County

Yuanjiang County

Baoshan 
Longyang District

Tengchong city

Shidian County

Longling County

Changning County

Zhaotong 
Zhaoyang District

Shuifu city

Ludian County

Qiaojia County

Yanjin County

Daguan County

Yongshan County

Suijiang County

Zhenxiong County

Yiliang County

Weixin County

Lijiang 
Gucheng District

Yongsheng County

Huaping County

Yulong County

Ninglang County

Pu'er 
Simao District

Ning'er County

Mojiang County

Jingdong County

Jinggu County

Zhenyuan County

Jiangcheng County

Menglian County

Lancang County

Ximeng County

Lincang 
Linxiang District

Fengqing County

Yun County

Yongde County

Zhenkang County

Shuangjiang County

Gengma County

Cangyuan County

Autonomous prefectures

Chuxiong 
Chuxiong city

Shuangbai County

Mouding County

Nanhua County

Yao'an County

Dayao County

Yongren County

Yuanmou County

Wuding County

Lufeng County

Honghe 
Mengzi city

Gejiu city

Kaiyuan city

Mile city

Lüchun County

Jianshui County

Shiping County

Luxi County

Yuanyang County

Honghe County

Jinping County

Hekou County

Pingbian County

Wenshan 
Wenshan city

Yanshan County

Xichou County

Malipo County

Maguan County

Qiubei County

Guangnan County

Funing County

Xishuangbanna 
Jinghong City

Menghai County

Mengla County

Dali 
Dali city

Xiangyun County

Binchuan County

Midu County

Yongping County

Yunlong County

Eryuan County

Jianchuan County

Heqing County

Yangbi County

Nanjian County

Weishan County

Dehong 
Mangshi city

Ruili city

Lianghe County

Yingjiang County

Longchuan County

Nujiang 
Lushui city

Fugong County

Gongshan County

Lanping County

Diqing 
Shangri-La city

Dêqên County

Weixi County

Coordinates: 24°49′31″N 103°19′25″E / 24.82528°N 103.32361°E / 24.82528; 103.32361
