"Body of surface water flowing down a channel

For other uses, see Stream (disambiguation).

"Rivulet" redirects here. For the moth, see Rivulet (moth).

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Stream" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (October 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Aubach (Wiehl) in North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany

Rocky stream in Italy

A stream is a body of water with surface water flowing within the bed and banks of a channel. The flow of a stream is controlled by three inputs - surface water, subsurface water and groundwater. The surface and subsurface water are highly variable between periods of rainfall. Groundwater, on the other hand, has a relatively constant input and is controlled more by long-term patterns of precipitation. The stream encompasses surface, subsurface and groundwater fluxes that respond to geological, geomorphological, hydrological and biotic controls.

Depending on its location or certain characteristics, a stream may be referred to by a variety of local or regional names. Long large streams are usually called rivers.

Streams are important as conduits in the water cycle, instruments in groundwater recharge, and corridors for fish and wildlife migration. The biological habitat in the immediate vicinity of a stream is called a riparian zone. Given the status of the ongoing Holocene extinction, streams play an important corridor role in connecting fragmented habitats and thus in conserving biodiversity. The study of streams and waterways in general is known as surface hydrology and is a core element of environmental geography.

Contents

1 Types

2 Other names

2.1 United Kingdom

2.2 North America

3 Other terminology

4 Sources

5 Characteristics

6 Intermittent and ephemeral streams

6.1 Ephemeral stream

6.2 Intermittent stream

7 Drainage basins

8 Crossings

9 See also

10 References

11 External links

Types

A rocky creek in Spearfish Canyon, South Dakota, US

Play media

Creek babbling through Benvoulin, Canada, wetlands

Wyming Brook in Sheffield, UK

Brook near the Bay of Fundy, Canada

A small stream in Lake Parramatta, Sydney

A low level stream in Macon County, Illinois, US

Brook

A stream smaller than a creek, especially one that is fed by a spring or seep. It is usually small and easily forded. A brook is characterised by its shallowness.

Creek (/kriːk/) or crick (/krɪk/):

In Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United States, a (narrow) stream that is smaller than a river; a minor tributary of a river; brook. Sometimes navigable by motor craft and may be intermittent.

In parts of Maryland, New England, the UK and India, a tidal inlet, typically in a salt marsh or mangrove swamp, or between enclosed and drained former salt marshes or swamps (e.g. Port Creek separating Portsea Island from the mainland). In these cases, the stream is the tidal stream, the course of the seawater through the creek channel at low and high tide.

River

A large natural stream, which may be a waterway.

Runnel

The linear channel between the parallel ridges or bars on a shoreline beach or river floodplain, or between a bar and the shore. Also called a swale.

Tributary

A contributory stream, or a stream which does not reach a static body of water such as a lake or ocean, but joins another river (a parent river). Sometimes also called a branch or fork.

Other names

There are a number of regional names for a stream.

United Kingdom

Allt is used in the Scottish Highlands.

Beck is used in Lincolnshire to Cumbria in areas which were once occupied by the Danes and Norwegians.

Bourne or winterbourne is used in the chalk downland of southern England for ephemeral rivers. When permanent, they are chalk streams.

Brook.

Burn is used in Scotland and North East England.

Gill or ghyll is seen in the north of England and Kent and Surrey influenced by Old Norse. The variant "ghyll" is used in the Lake District and appears to have been an invention of William Wordsworth.

Nant is used in Wales.

Rivulet is a term encountered in Victorian era publications.

Stream

Syke is used in lowland Scotland and Cumbria for a seasonal stream.

North America

Branch is used to name streams in Maryland and Virginia.

Creek is common throughout the United States, as well as Australia.

Falls is also used to name streams in Maryland, for streams/rivers which have waterfalls on them, even if such falls only have a small vertical drop. Little Gunpowder Falls and the Jones Falls are actually rivers named in this manner, unique to Maryland.

Kill in New York, Pennsylvania, Delaware, and New Jersey comes from a Dutch language word meaning "riverbed" or "water channel", and can also be used for the UK meaning of 'creek'.

Run in Ohio, Maryland, Michigan, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Virginia, or West Virginia can be the name of a stream.

Run in Florida is the name given to streams coming out of small natural springs. River is used for streams from larger springs like the Silver River and Rainbow River.

Stream and brook are used in Midwestern states, Mid-Atlantic states, and New England.

Other terminology

Bar

A shoal that develops in a stream as sediment is deposited as the current slows or is impeded by wave action at the confluence.

Bifurcation

A fork into two or more streams.

Channel

A depression created by constant erosion that carries the stream's flow.

Confluence

The point at which the two streams merge. If the two tributaries are of approximately equal size, the confluence may be called a fork.

Drainage basin

(also known as a watershed in the United States) The area of land where water flows into a stream. A large drainage basin such as the Amazon River contains many smaller drainage basins.

Floodplain

Lands adjacent to the stream that are subject to flooding when a stream overflows its banks.

Gaging station

A site along the route of a stream or river, used for reference marking or water monitoring.

Headwaters

The part of a stream or river proximate to its source. The word is most commonly used in the plural where there is no single point source.

Knickpoint

The point on a stream's profile where a sudden change in stream gradient occurs.

Mouth

The point at which the stream discharges, possibly via an estuary or delta, into a static body of water such as a lake or ocean.

Pool

A segment where the water is deeper and slower moving.

Rapids

A turbulent, fast-flowing stretch of a stream or river.

Riffle

A segment where the flow is shallower and more turbulent.

River

A large natural stream, which may be a waterway.

Run

A somewhat smoothly flowing segment of the stream.

Source

The spring from which the stream originates, or other point of origin of a stream.

Spring

The point at which a stream emerges from an underground course through unconsolidated sediments or through caves. A stream can, especially with caves, flow aboveground for part of its course, and underground for part of its course.

Stream bed

The bottom of a stream.

Stream corridor

Stream, its floodplains, and the transitional upland fringe

Streamflow

The water moving through a stream channel.

Thalweg

The river's longitudinal section, or the line joining the deepest point in the channel at each stage from source to mouth.

Waterfall or cascade

The fall of water where the stream goes over a sudden drop called a knickpoint; some knickpoints are formed by erosion when water flows over an especially resistant stratum, followed by one less so. The stream expends kinetic energy in "trying" to eliminate the knickpoint.

Wetted perimeter

The line on which the stream's surface meets the channel walls.

Sources

Small tributary stream, Diamond Ridge, Alaska, US

Creek in Perisher Ski Resort, Australia

Streams typically derive most of their water from precipitation in the form of rain and snow. Most of this water re-enters the atmosphere by evaporation from soil and water bodies, or by the evapotranspiration of plants. Some of the water proceeds to sink into the earth by infiltration and becomes groundwater, much of which eventually enters streams. Some precipitated water is temporarily locked up in snow fields and glaciers, to be released later by evaporation or melting. The rest of the water flows off the land as runoff, the proportion of which varies according to many factors, such as wind, humidity, vegetation, rock types, and relief. This runoff starts as a thin film called sheet wash, combined with a network of tiny rills, together constituting sheet runoff; when this water is concentrated in a channel, a stream has its birth. Some creeks may start from ponds or lakes.

Stream in Southbury, Connecticut, US

Characteristics

Ranking

To qualify as a stream, a body of water must be either recurring or perennial. Recurring (intermittent) streams have water in the channel for at least part of the year. A stream of the first order is a stream which does not have any other recurring or perennial stream feeding into it. When two first-order streams come together, they form a second-order stream. When two second-order streams come together, they form a third-order stream. Streams of lower order joining a higher order stream do not change the order of the higher stream. Thus, if a first-order stream joins a second-order stream, it remains a second-order stream. It is not until a second-order stream combines with another second-order stream that it becomes a third-order stream.

Gradient

The gradient of a stream is a critical factor in determining its character and is entirely determined by its base level of erosion. The base level of erosion is the point at which the stream either enters the ocean, a lake or pond, or enters a stretch in which it has a much lower gradient, and may be specifically applied to any particular stretch of a stream.

In geological terms, the stream will erode down through its bed to achieve the base level of erosion throughout its course. If this base level is low, then the stream will rapidly cut through underlying strata and have a steep gradient, and if the base level is relatively high, then the stream will form a flood plain and meander.

Meander

Meanders are looping changes of direction of a stream caused by the erosion and deposition of bank materials. These are typically serpentine in form. Typically, over time the meanders gradually migrate downstream.

If some resistant material slows or stops the downstream movement of a meander, a stream may erode through the neck between two legs of a meander to become temporarily straighter, leaving behind an arc-shaped body of water termed an oxbow lake or bayou. A flood may also cause a meander to be cut through in this way.

Profile

Typically, streams are said to have a particular profile, beginning with steep gradients, no flood plain, and little shifting of channels, eventually evolving into streams with low gradients, wide flood plains, and extensive meanders. The initial stage is sometimes termed a "young" or "immature" stream, and the later state a "mature" or "old" stream. However, a stream may meander for some distance before falling into a "young" stream condition.

Stream load

Streams can carry sediment, or alluvium. The amount of load it can carry (capacity) as well as the largest object it can carry (competence) are both dependent on the velocity of the stream.

Intermittent and ephemeral streams

See also: Intermittent river

Australian creek, low in the dry season, carrying little water. The energetic flow of the stream had, in flood, moved finer sediment further downstream. There is a pool to lower right and a riffle to upper left of the photograph.

A perennial stream is one which flows continuously all year.:57
Some perennial streams may only have continuous flow in segments of its stream bed year round during years of normal rainfall.

Blue-line streams are perennial streams and are marked on topographic maps with a solid blue line.

Ephemeral stream

Generally, streams that flow only during and immediately after precipitation are termed ephemeral. There is no clear demarcation between surface runoff and an ephemeral stream,:58 and some ephemeral streams can be classed as intermittent—flow all but disappearing in the normal course of seasons but ample flow (backups) restoring stream presence—such circumstances are documented when stream beds have opened up a path into mines or other underground chambers.

Intermittent stream

or seasonal stream

In the United States, an intermittent or seasonal stream is one that only flows for part of the year and is marked on topographic maps with a line of blue dashes and dots.:57–58 A wash or desert wash is normally a dry streambed in the deserts of the American Southwest which flows only after significant rainfall. Washes can fill up quickly during rains, and there may be a sudden torrent of water after a thunderstorm begins upstream, such as during monsoonal conditions. These flash floods often catch travelers by surprise. An intermittent stream can also be called an arroyo in Latin America, a winterbourne in Britain, or a wadi in the Arabic-speaking world.

In Italy, an intermittent stream is termed a torrent (Italian torrente). In full flood the stream may or may not be "torrential" in the dramatic sense of the word, but there will be one or more seasons in which the flow is reduced to a trickle or less. Typically torrents have Apennine rather than Alpine sources, and in the summer they are fed by little precipitation and no melting snow. In this case the maximum discharge will be during the spring and autumn. However, there are also glacial torrents with a different seasonal regime.

In Australia, an intermittent stream is usually called a creek and marked on topographic maps with a solid blue line.

Drainage basins

The extent of land basin drained by a stream is termed its drainage basin (also known in North America as the watershed and, in British English, as a catchment). A basin may also be composed of smaller basins. For instance, the Continental Divide in North America divides the mainly easterly-draining Atlantic Ocean and Arctic Ocean basins from the largely westerly-flowing Pacific Ocean basin. The Atlantic Ocean basin, however, may be further subdivided into the Atlantic Ocean and Gulf of Mexico drainages. (This delineation is termed the Eastern Continental Divide.) Similarly, the Gulf of Mexico basin may be divided into the Mississippi River basin and several smaller basins, such as the Tombigbee River basin. Continuing in this vein, a component of the Mississippi River basin is the Ohio River basin, which in turn includes the Kentucky River basin, and so forth.

Crossings

Stream crossings are where streams are crossed by roads, pipelines, railways, or any other thing which might restrict the flow of the stream in ordinary or flood conditions. Any structure over or in a stream which results in limitations on the movement of fish or other ecological elements may be an issue.

See also

Chalk stream

Head cut

Playfair's Law

River ecosystem

Rock-cut basin

References

^ Langbein, W.B.; Iseri, Kathleen T. (1995). "Hydrologic Definitions: Stream". Manual of Hydrology: Part 1. General Surface-Water Techniques (Water Supply Paper 1541-A). Reston, VA: USGS. Archived from the original on 2012-05-09.

^ Basic Biology (16 January 2016). "River".

^ Alexander, L. C., Autrey, B., DeMeester, J., Fritz, K. M., Golden, H. E., Goodrich, D. C., ... McManus, M. G. (2015). Connectivity of streams and wetlands to downstream waters: review and synthesis of the scientific evidence (Vol. 475). EPA/600/R-14.

^ "What is hydrology and what do hydrologists do?" Archived 2014-02-22 at the Wayback Machine U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). Atlanta, GA. 2009-05-13.

^ "creek". dictionary.com. Dictionary.com, LLC. Retrieved 16 May 2019. kreek, krik

^ "crick". English Oxford Living Dictionaries. Oxford University Press. Retrieved 18 May 2019. Northern, North Midland, and Western U.S.

^ "creek". oxforddictionaries.com. Oxford University Press. Retrieved 18 May 2019. British...especially an inlet...(whereas) NZ, North American, Australian...stream or minor tributary.

^ "(US) creek". English Oxford Living Dictionaries. Oxford University Press. Retrieved 18 May 2019. North American, Australian, NZ...A stream, brook, or minor tributary of a river.

^ "creek". Dictionary.com. Dictionary.com, LLC. Retrieved 18 May 2019. U.S., Canada , and Australia…a stream smaller than a river.

^ "creek". Collins. Collins. Retrieved 18 May 2019. US, Canadian, Australian and New Zealand a small stream or tributary

^ "creek". Macmillan Dictionary. Springer Nature Limited. Retrieved 18 May 2019. a narrow stream

^ 

^ Spruce Creek Association. Kittery, ME. "About the Spruce Creek Watershed." Archived 2008-07-03 at the Wayback Machine Accessed 2010-10-02.

^ Wetzel, Robert G. (2001). Limnology: Lake and river ecosystems (3rd ed.). San Diego: Academic Press. ISBN 978-0127447605. OCLC 46393244.

^ Krebs, Robert E. (2003). The Basics of Earth Science. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-313-31930-3.

^ Bisson, Peter and Wondzell, Steven. “Olympic Experimental State Forest Synthesis of Riparian Research and Monitoring”, United States Forest Service, p. 15 (December 1, 2009).

^ "OED Online - Beck". Oxford University Press. June 2017. Retrieved 6 July 2017.

^ "OED Online - Bourne". Oxford University Press. June 2017. Retrieved 6 July 2017.

^ "OED Online - Brook". Oxford University Press. June 2017. Retrieved 6 July 2017.

^ "OED Online - Burn". Oxford University Press. June 2017. Retrieved 6 July 2017.

^ "OED Online - Gill". Oxford University Press. June 2017. Retrieved 6 July 2017.

^ "OED Online - Nant". Oxford University Press. June 2017. Retrieved 6 July 2017.

^ "OED Online - Rivulet". Oxford University Press. June 2017. Retrieved 6 July 2017.

^ "OED Online - Sike". Oxford University Press. June 2017. Retrieved 6 July 2017.

^ "OED Online -Branch". Oxford University Press. June 2017. Retrieved 6 July 2017.

^ a b "Derek Watkin's USGS Analysis". Retrieved 26 November 2018.

^ Steigerwalt, Nancy M.; Cichra, Charles E.; Baker, Shirley M. (2008). "Composition and Distribution of Aquatic Invertebrate Communities on Snags in a North Central Florida, USA, Spring-Run Stream". Florida Scientist. 71 (3): 273–286. JSTOR 24321406. 

^ a b c d e f g "USGS Water Science Glossary of Terms". United States Geological Survey. 26 November 2018.

^ "Stream Corridor Structure" Archived 2015-04-02 at the Wayback Machine Adapted from Stream Corridor Restoration: Principles, Processes, and Practices

^ a b c Meinzer, Oscar E. (1923). Outline of ground-water hydrology, with definitions. Washington, DC: USGS. Archived from the original on 2017-07-09. Water Supply Paper 494.

^ Meinzer, Oscar E. (1923). Outline of ground-water hydrology, with definitions. Washington, DC: US Geological Survey (USGS). p. 57. Archived from the original on 2017-07-09. Water Supply Paper 494.

^ "OSM - COALEX State Inquiry Report 97". Archived from the original on 2012-04-15. Retrieved 2011-12-11.

^ Black Creek (Susquehanna River)#Hydrology_and_climate, `Black Creek is an ephemeral stream. It used to drain an area between Turtle Creek and the Susquehanna River, but now loses its flow to underground mines via broken bedrock. Its channel is also disrupted by strip mines and rock piles.', 14 Nov 2016.

^ Langbein, W.B.; Iseri, Kathleen T. (1995). "Hydrologic Definitions: Watershed". Manual of Hydrology: Part 1. General Surface-Water Techniques (Water Supply Paper 1541-A). Reston, VA: USGS. Archived from the original on 2012-05-09.

External links

 Look up stream in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Streams.

 Wikiquote has quotations related to: Streams

Glossary of stream-related terms, StreamNet

v

t

e

Rivers, streams and springs

Rivers 
Alluvial river

Braided river

Blackwater river

Channel

Channel pattern

Channel types

Confluence

Distributary

Drainage basin

Subterranean river

River bifurcation

River ecosystem

River source

Tributary

more...

Streams 
Arroyo

Bourne

Burn

Chalk stream

Coulee

Current

Stream

Stream bed

Stream channel

Stream gradient

Stream pool

Perennial stream

Winterbourne

more...

Springs 
Geyser

Sacred spring

Hot spring

Karst spring

Mineral spring

Rhythmic spring

Spring

Spring horizon

more...

Sedimentary processes

and erosion 
Abrasion

Anabranch

Aggradation

Armor

Bed load

Bed material load

Granular flow

Debris flow

Deposition

Dissolved load

Downcutting

Erosion

Headward erosion

Knickpoint

Palaeochannel

Progradation

Retrogradation

Saltation

Secondary flow

Sediment transport

Suspended load

Wash load

Water gap

Fluvial landforms 
Ait

Alluvial fan

Antecedent drainage stream

Avulsion

Bank

Bar

Bayou

Billabong

Canyon

Chine

Cut bank

Estuary

Fluvial terrace

Gill

Gulch

Gully

Glen

Meander scar

Mouth bar

Oxbow lake

Riffle-pool sequence

Point bar

Ravine

Rill

River island

Rock-cut basin

Sedimentary basin

Sedimentary structures

Strath

Thalweg

River valley

Wadi

Fluvial flow 
Helicoidal flow

International Scale of River Difficulty

Meander

Plunge pool

Rapids

Riffle

Shoal

Waterfall

Whitewater

Surface runoff 
Agricultural wastewater treatment

Effluent

First flush

Urban runoff

Wastewater

Floods and stormwater 
100-year flood

Crevasse splay

Flash flood

Flood

Flood barrier

Flood control

Flood forecasting

Flood-meadow

Floodplain

Flood pulse concept

Flooded grasslands and savannas

Storm Water Management Model

Return period

River measurement

and modelling 
Baer's law

Baseflow

Bradshaw model

Discharge (hydrology)

Drainage density

Exner equation

Groundwater model

Hack's law

Hjulström curve

Hydrograph

Hydrological modelling

Hydrological transport model

Infiltration (hydrology)

Main stem

Playfair's Law

Relief ratio

River continuum concept

Rouse number

Runoff curve number

Runoff model (reservoir)

Stream gauge

Universal Soil Loss Equation

WAFLEX

Wetted perimeter

Volumetric flow rate

River engineering 
Aqueduct

Balancing lake

Canal

Check dam

Dam

Drop structure

Daylighting

Detention basin

Erosion control

Fish ladder

Floodplain restoration

Flume

Infiltration basin

Leat

Levee

Retention basin

Revetment

Riparian zone restoration

Stream restoration

Weir

River sports 
Canyoning

Rafting

River surfing

Riverboarding

Whitewater canoeing

Whitewater kayaking

Whitewater slalom

Other topics 
Aquifer

Aquatic toxicology

Body of water

Limnology

Riparian zone

River civilization

River cruise

Surface water

World Rivers Day

Lists of rivers

Rivers by length

Rivers by discharge rate

Drainage basins

Whitewater rivers

Flash floods

River name etymologies

Authority control 
GND: 4140549-3
