"For the film, see Streetballers.

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Streetball" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (March 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Streetballers at the Venice Beach basketball courts, California, United States.

Streetball (or street basketball) is a variation of basketball, typically played on outdoor courts and featuring significantly less formal structure and enforcement of the game's rules. As such, its format is more conducive to allowing players to publicly showcase their own individual skills. Streetball may also refer to other urban sports played on asphalt. It is particularly popular and important in New York City.

Some places and cities in the United States have organized streetball programs, operated similarly to midnight basketball programs. Many cities also host their own weekend-long streetball tournaments, with Hoop-It-Up and the Houston Rockets' Blacktop Battle being two of the most popular. Since the mid-2000s, streetball has seen an increase in media exposure through television shows such as ESPN's Street Basketball and City Slam, as well as traveling exhibitions such as the AND1 Mixtape Tour, YPA, and Ball4Real.

It is also popular in other countries like Philippines. Most of their streets have their own basketball court. Tournaments are also organized especially during summer and holiday season. Divisions are divided into 4 brackets, Mosquito (ages 7 to 13), Midget (ages 14 to 17), Junior (ages 18 to 25), and Senior division (ages 26 and up).

Contents

1 Rules and features

1.1 Half-court play

1.2 Game structure

2 Variations

2.1 Twenty-one

2.2 King of the Court

2.3 H-O-R-S-E

2.4 Others

3 Notable streetballers

4 Streetball in popular media

4.1 Films and TV programs

4.2 Video games

5 See also

6 References

7 External links

Rules and features

Children playing streetball in Paris in winter

Streetball rules vary widely from court to court.

Players typically divide into teams by alternating choices.

No referees are employed, so almost invariably a "call your own foul" rule is in effect, and a player who believes he has been fouled, simply needs to call out "Foul!", and play will be stopped, with the ball awarded to the fouled player's team (free throws are not awarded in streetball). It is also standard that the hands are considered part of the ball.

Calling fouls is generally disfavored. The etiquette of what rightly constitutes a foul, as well as the permissible amount of protestation against such a call, are the products of individual groups, and of the seriousness of a particular game.

Other violations which are enforced include traveling, double-dribble, carrying, kicking, goaltending, and backcourt violation.

Half-court play

Since there are not always enough players to play on a full court (typically 4-on-4 is a minimum for full court) and full-court games are more physically demanding, the majority of Streetball games are played on a half court. Special rules have been developed for half-court play:

At the beginning of the game and after each made basket, play begins at the top of the key. A "checking" system is used to ensure that both teams are ready to begin play. This involves the offensive player saying "check" while throwing the ball to his defender. The defender then makes sure his/her team is ready and then throws the ball back to begin play.

If the ball goes out of bounds during play, the ball can either be checked from out of bounds near where the ball went out or at the top of the key, depending on the rules established before the game.

FIBA recently had to add the ‘check clock’ rule into play in their streetball tournaments due to some players taking excruciatingly long amounts of time to check the ball, interrupting the flow of play. This ‘check clock’ means that when the defending player has been checked the ball, he has to return it within 5 seconds.

If the defending team gains possession of the ball, they must take the ball out to beyond the three-point line before they can score a basket. This does not need to be at the top of the key (one leg crossing the line is enough) and no checking is required. This is analogous to taking the ball to the other side of the court in a full-court game.

Game structure

A common feature of street basketball is the pick up game. To participate in most streetball games around the world, one simply goes to an outdoor court where people are playing, indicates a wish to participate, and from all the players who were at the court before one has played, two players acting as "captains" will get to pick their team out of the players available and play a game. Generally, the team captains alternate their choices, but different courts have differing rules in regards to player selection. Many games play up to 7, 11, 13, 15, or 21 points with 2-point baskets and 3-point baskets counting for 1 and 2 points respectively. It is possible to do (1's only), (2's only), (1's and 2's), (2's and 3's) or (1's, 2's and 3's)

1's only – each basket counts as 1 point

2's only – each basket counts as 2 points

1's and 2's – each basket counts as 1 point if inside the arc, or 2 points if outside the arc

2's and 3's (NBA Style) – each basket counts as 2 points if inside the arc, or 3 points if outside the arc

1's, 2's and 3's – You need at least 3 teams for this, baskets count as 1 or 2 points until one of the 3 teams score a certain number of points, then the other 2 teams play for second place with baskets counting for 2 and 3 points

Players often play 'win by 2' which, as in tennis, means that the team has to win by a margin of at least 2 points. Sometimes a local "dead end" limit applies; for instance a game may be played to 7, win by 2, with a 9-point dead end, (referred to as "7 by 2's, 9 straight") which would mean scores of 7–3, 8–6, or 9–8 would all be final, while with scores of 7–6 or 8–7, play would continue. The most common streetball game is 3 on 3 played half court, though 5 on 5 full court can be found. Another common variation to the rules is the "skunk" rule. This merely means that if a player reaches a certain point without the other player scoring, the game is over. The skunk rule limit can vary, but is often used at the score 7 to 0.

Sometimes in a half-court game, a "winner's ball" or "make it, take it" rule is used. This means that if a team scores, it gets the ball again on offense; one team could end up never getting the ball on offense if the other team scores on every possession. Full court basketball is not played with these rules, but, in most instances, the winning team gets to choose which basketball and usually which direction (which basket) they get to use. Also, if the ball goes out of bounds players must check up.

Another possible streetball feature is having an MC call the game. The MC is on the court during the game and is often very close to the players (but makes an effort to not interfere with the game) and uses a microphone to provide game commentary for the fans.

If the player loses the match of a 1v1 ("one-on-one", two players competing alone), the losing player is given a second chance to shoot a shot at the three point line. This either results with the match continuing or if the match is close enough resulting in a tie.

In a game of 1v1, in a close game the game cannot end on a bank shot. If a bank shot happens on the last point of the game it is a replay of possession.

Variations

Twenty-one

Main article: Twenty-one (basketball)

A popular variation of street basketball is 21, also known as Hustle, American, St. Mary's, a V or Varsity, Roughhouse, 33, 50 or Crunch, or "New York." 21 is played most often with 3-5 players on a half court, typically when not enough players have arrived at the playground to "run 3's" (play 3-on-3). However it is possible to play "21" with only two players, or more than 5.

Further, in some forms, players can freely enter the game after it has begun, starting at zero points or being "spotted" the same number as the player with the lowest score. "21" is an "every player for himself" game, with highly variable rules. The rules of "21" are usually agreed by the players at the beginning of the game.

The typical rules of "21" are:

one player "breaks" to begin the game by shooting from 3 point range. Sometimes players agree that the "break" must not be a successful shot, in order to give every player an equal chance at rebounding to gain the 1st possession of the game

the normal foul rule is in effect

baskets are scored as 2's and 3's (as opposed to 1's and 2's like Streetball)

after a successful shot, the shooter can take up to three 1-point free-throws (or play the "shoot til you miss" variation, where the shooter continues to shoot the ball until he misses), but as soon as he misses, the ball may be rebounded by anyone; conversely, if he makes all three free throw shots, he then gets to keep the ball and "check up" or start play again at the top of the arc

In some games 1 point free throws start at the charity stripe and then move to the 3 point line at the score 11 and so on (called 11 long or if at the 3 point line from the first score for free throws is called "long all day")

the last person with a shot attempt should be the first person to step out on defense

after any change of possession, the ball should be cleared past the 3 point line (or at times just out of the key)

in order to win, a player must make exactly 21 points; if he goes over then he restarts back at either 11, 13 or 15 points, depending on the rules in use

whoever wins the game starts with the ball at the beginning of the next game

only serious fouls are called (commonly referred to as "No blood, No foul")

other typical basketball rules, such as out-of-bounds, are also frequently ignored in the game "21"; this is to avoid confusion on possession of the ball

Common additional rules include:

a player can attempt a 5-pointer in lieu of attempting three free-throws

if a missed shot is "tipped in" to the basket by another player without their feet touching the ground, then the shooter's score reverts to zero (or thirteen if their score was over thirteen); this rule may not apply on free-throws. This is referred to as "playing with tips"

if a player who has 13 points misses their next shot, regardless of whether it is a free-throw, then their points revert to zero. This is referred to as "poison points"

whoever wins the game must shoot a three-pointer in order to start with the ball at the beginning of the next game; if he makes it, he gets the three points, but doesn't have to take free-throws, and starts with the ball

players with less than 13 points at the end of a game keep their points into the next game (a sort of handicap system for when there is a wide variation in skill amongst the players)

"21" is considered a very challenging game, especially because the offensive player must possibly go up against several defenders at the same time. For this reason, it is exceedingly difficult to "drive to the hole" and make lay-ups in "21." Therefore, and also because of the emphasis on free-throws, "21" is very much a shooter's game, and because a successful shot means you keep the ball, it is possible for there to be come-backs when a player recovers from a large deficit by not missing any shots (this can also result in failure when they miss their final free-throw at 20 points and revert to 13 or 15 etc.).

"21" is popular because it allows an odd number of people to play, unlike regular basketball or other variants.

King of the Court

Another less common streetball variant, often referred to as "King of the Court", or "Boston", results in essentially a one-on-one (or sometimes two-on-two) tournament between any number of players. Each match is played following normal one-on-one rules, including violations (such as fouls and out-of-bounds) to just one point. The winner remains on the court and gets to take the ball out while the loser returns to the end of the line of players waiting to step on the court. The first player to win a set number of matches (usually 7 or 11) wins the game.Can only take one shot per turn

Main article: 3x3 basketball

H-O-R-S-E

H-o-r-s-e is a game played by two or more people on a basketball court. The goal of the game involves matching baskets. The player who makes more shots that the opponent can't duplicate, wins the game. For example: The second person shooting must match the first person's shot if it is made. If the second shooter misses, he or she receives the letter H. If the first person shot is missed, the second shooter may attempt any shot. The game continues until one person accumulates 5 letters or H-O-R-S-E.

Others

Main article: Variations of basketball § Activities

Notable streetballers

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Rafer "Skip to my Lou" Alston

Sylvester "Sy" Blye

Emmanuel "Hard Work" Bibb

Grayson "The Professor" Boucher

Cardell "Ballaholic" Butler

Kevin "Bizzness" Butler

Philip Champion aka Hot Sauce/Sizzle

Lloyd "Swee' Pea" Daniels

Jamar "The Pharmacist" Davis

Waliyy "Main Event" Dixon

Brandon "The Assassin" Durham

Taurian "Mr. 720" Fontenette

Bobbito García

Connie "The Hawk" Hawkins

Deshun "Father Time" Jackson

Jumpin Jackie Jackson

Troy "Escalade" Jackson

Richard "Pee Wee" Kirkland

Raymond Lewis

Earl "The Goat" Manigault

Robert "50" Martin

Demetrius "Hook" Mitchell

Aaron "AO" Owens

Darren "Primal Fear" Phillip

Kareem "The Best Kept Secret" Reid

Jack "Black Jack" Ryan

Ed "Booger" Smith

John "The Franchise" Strickland

Roberto "Exile" Yong

Joe Hammond (basketball)

William Sanders (basketball)

Adrian Walton

Malloy Nesmith Sr.

Shamel Jones

James Pookie Wilson

Corey "Homicide" Williams

Larry "Bone Collector" Williams

James Speedy Williams

Danjels "Dan Jels" Reedman

Carlo "The Big Show" Ramirez

Streetball in popular media

See also: Rucker Park

Films and TV programs

Above the Rim

American History X

City Slam, a television program broadcast on ESPN

Crossover

He Got Game

Like Mike 2: Streetball

White Men Can't Jump

Uncle Drew

Video games

AND 1 Streetball, video game by Ubisoft (2006)

FreeStyle Street Basketball, an online PC game by JC Entertainment

NBA Ballers, video game by Midway (2004)
sequels to NBA Ballers: NBA Ballers: Rebound, NBA Ballers: Phenom, and NBA Ballers: Chosen One

NBA Street, video game series by EA Sports

See also

3x3 (basketball)

References

^ "Streetball - InsideHoops.com". www.insidehoops.com. Retrieved 2017-12-19.

^ "A Complete Guide to Crushing It at NYC Streetball". Complex. Retrieved 2017-12-19.

^ Bush, Elizabeth (2012). "H.O.R.S.E: A Game of Basketball and Imagination". Cite journal requires |journal= (help)

External links

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Streetball.

Streetball.com Global Basketball Community

Streetball.ca Canada based streetball/events website

Streetball Europe 1st all European Streetball tournament

Australian Streetball 3N3 League 1st 3on3 Streetball League in Australia

Variations of basketball The game of H.O.R.S.E

v

t

e

Contemporary African-American culture

Fashion and style 
African American English

African American hair

Sagging

Crunk

Grills

Sneaker collecting

Streetball

Crip Walk

Television, film and music 
African American films

BET

Black sitcoms

Reality TV

Bounce TV

Hood film

Events 
Black Reel Awards

American Black Film Festival

BET Awards

Hair Wars

Urban Beach Week

Black Bike Week

Cultural and population centres 
Atlanta

Memphis

Detroit

South Side, Chicago

Harlem

New Orleans

Washington, D.C.

South Los Angeles

Cities and neighborhoods:

Cities with large African American populations

Communities with African American majority populations

Concepts and slang 
Bling-bling

Good hair

CPT

Baby mama

Down-low

Stop Snitchin'

Acting white

Purple drank

The Dozens

Social issues 
Racial profiling (Driving While Black)

Police brutality

Gangs

Tobacco marketing and African Americans
