This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Sumitra Peries" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (February 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Sumitra Peries

Born (1934-03-24) 24 March 1934 (age 86)

Avissawella, Sri Lanka

Spouse(s) Lester James Peries (1964-2018)
Sumitra Peries on IMDb

Sumitra Peries (born 24 March 1934) is the first Sri Lankan female filmmaker and is known by all as the "Poetess of Sinhala Cinema". She also held the post of Sri Lanka's ambassador to France, Spain and the United Nations in the late 1990s. Of her films the more popular ones are Gehenu Lamai, Ganga Addara and Yahaluvo. She is married to the most prolific Sri Lankan film director Dr. Lester James Peries.

Contents

1 Biography

1.1 Early life

1.2 Studies

1.3 Personal life

2 Career

2.1 Film career

2.2 Professional career

3 Awards

3.1 International awards

3.2 National awards

4 The Lester James Peries and Sumitra Peries Foundation

5 Latest news

6 See also

7 References

8 External links

Biography

Early life

Sumitra Gunawardena (birth name) was born on 24 March 1934 to a Marxist family known as the Boralugoda Gunewardene's in Avissawella. Her father, Henry (better known as Harry) Gunawardena was a proctor in Avissawella, and brother of the famous politicians Philip Gunawardena and Robert Gunawardena and her mother, Harriette Wickramasinghe was from a middle-class family. Three of Sumitra's relatives, Dinesh Gunawardena, Geethanjana Gunawardena and Prasanna Gunawardena, are still in Sri Lankan politics today.

When Sumitra was just 14 years of age, her mother died. At that time her brother Gamini was five years older and her sister Chandralatha, three years older. She also has a younger brother Ranjith. After the tragedy of their mother's death, Gamini went to the south of France and lived in a yacht with a French painter.

Sumitra began her education in Avissawella, then later enrolled to Visakha Vidyalaya in Colombo and finally joined the Aquinas College Colombo to do the London Advanced Level.

At the age of 20 Sumitra managed to find some money and travelled to Europe by ship to meet her elder brother Gamini. She was to build her own career there, although she didn't know it at the time.

Studies

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

She studied film making at the London School of Film Technique and was awarded a Diploma in Film Direction and Production (1957–1959). She was the only woman studying this subject there at that time. After passing out, she began working at Mai Harris, a subtitling firm for a short period and later returned home to Sri Lanka. It was briefly before she left that she happened to meet her to-be-husband at the residence of Mr. Vernon Mendis, who was a mutual friend of Lester and Sumitra.

Later on her arrival in Sri Lanka, Sumitra's brother Gamini contacted Lester and checked the possibility of her sister working with him on shoot. Lester agreed and Sumitra started work as assistant director in his second film Sandesaya. A filmmaking company called Cinelanka was established later in 1963 with Anton Wickramasinghe, Lester and Sumitra as major shareholders.

Personal life

Sumitra married Lester James Peries (1919-2018) on 19 June 1964 at All Saints Church, Borella and a reception was held at the residence of Anton Wickremasinghe afterwards.

Career

Film career

Sumitra started off her own cinema director debut with her first film Gehenu Lamai featuring newly discovered talent in the young Vasanthi Chathurani. The film was a box office hit and managed to bag many awards at the film festivals of the time. Her next film Ganga addara also featuring Vasanthi Chathurani, Vijaya Kumaratunge and Sanath Gunathileke was another box office hit. She has subsequently directed many more feature films which have all been subjected to international acclaim. 

YearFilmRef.

1978 Gehenu Lamai 

1980 Ganga Addara 

1982 Yahalu Yeheli 

1984 Maya 

1988 Sagara Jalaya Madi Handuwa Oba Handa 

1996 Loku Duwa 

1997 Duwata Mawaka Misa 

2003 Sakman Maluwa 

2018 Vaishnavee 

Professional career

In the 1980s, Sumitra was a member of the presidential commission for two years to conduct an inquiry into Sri Lanka's film sector regarding all aspects of the industry such as its troubles, statistics, public opinions and recommendations.

She was in charge of production for Worldview International in Sri Lanka in 1988–1990. Also during the late 1980s and early 1990s, she was a member of the Board of Management of the Institute of Aesthetique Studies, Kelaniya University, Sri Lanka during which Prof A. J. Gunewardena was the director general of the institute.

Sumitra later served as Sri Lanka's ambassador to France and Spain in 1996–1999 and was also appointed as the ambassador of Sri Lanka to the United Nations by President Chandrika Bandaranayake Kumaratunge. She served at her post during the bicentennial of "FILM" in its birthplace - France – and was conveniently able to take part in all celebrations along with her spouse Lester James Peries.

She won the award for the best film director in fifty years of Sri Lankan cinema.

Awards

International awards

Carthage International Film Festival – Gehenu Lamai – Diploma of Merit (1978), shared the jury award with Mirinal Sen of India.

London Film Festival – Gehenu Lamai – Outstanding Film of the Year (1978)

South Asian Film Festival in Tokyo, Japan – Ganga Addara – Diploma

Moscow International Film Festival – Yahalu Yeheli – Diploma (1984), purchased by a German television channel in 1986

Filmex International Film Festival, Los Angeles – Yahalu Yeheli – Diploma (1985)

International Film Festival, Tokyo – Sagara Jalaya – One of the Ten Best Films, purchased by a Japanese television station

Nantes International Film Festival – Loku Duwa – Diploma (1993)

Fukuoka International Film Festival – Loku Duwa (1994)

London Film Festival – Duwata Mawaka Misa – Diploma (1998)

International Film Festival, India – Duwata Mawaka Misa (1998)

Fukuoka International Film Festival – Duwata Mawaka Misa (1998)

Golden Lotus – Deauville Award for "Contribution to Asian Cinema" (2001)

National awards

Best Editor:

Gamperaliya – Sarasaviya Film Awards (1964)

Delovak Athara – Sarasaviya Film Awards (1967)

Ahasin Polawata – Presidential Awards (1979) & OCIC Awards (1979)

Bakmaha Deege – Critics Awards (1971)

Best Director:

Ganga Addara – Sarasaviya Film Awards (1981) & Presidential Awards (1981)

Yahalu Yeheli – Presidential Awards (1983) & OCIC Awards (1983)

Maya – Sarasaviya Film Awards (1984) & National Award for Best Film and Best Director in 1986.

Sagara Jalaya – OCIC Awards (1989) & Swarna Sanka Awards (1988)

Loku Duwa – Presidential Awards (1989) & Sarasaviya Silver Jubilee Awards (1988)

Duwata Mawaka Misa Presidential Awards (1996)

Zonta Arthur C Clark Award for Communication (1988)

Rana Thisara Lifetime Achievement Award (1993)

The Lester James Peries and Sumitra Peries Foundation

The Lester James Peries and Sumitra Peries foundation was inaugurated on Thursday 9 June 2011 at the BMICH with an oration by the chief Guest - celebrated Indian film maker Padma Vibushan Dr. Adoor Gopalakrishnan and the Speaker of Parliament Chamal Rajapakse was the Guest of Honour. The Foundation is incorporated through an act of Parliament of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. The bill of incorporation was forwarded to parliament by Hon. Malini Fonseka on 5 January 2011.

Latest news

Sumitra Peries latest cinema venture Vaishnavee shot in 2012 made her the first director ever to shoot with the latest Red Epic camera and this step has laid the foundation for the next Generation Digital Cinema for Sri Lanka. The film is speculated to be released around March next year. 
Dr. and Mrs. Peries recently celebrated their Golden wedding anniversary on 19 June 2014 and now live happily in the comfort of their home located down the road named after Dr. Lester James Peries.

There are two books written about her namely

1. Sumitra Peries- by Vilasnee Tampoe-Hautin (English)

2. Sumitra - by Ajith Galappaththi (Sinhala)

These two volumes are available in bookstores in Sri Lanka.

See also

Sri Lankan Non Career Diplomats

References

^ "Sumithra in the making of another cinematic gem". Sunday Times. Retrieved 8 December 2019.

^ "Profile:(Hollywood.com)". Hollywood.com. 12 January 2008. Archived from the original on 25 January 2013.

^ "Sumitra Peries a female idol". Sunday Observer (Sri Lanka). 22 September 2002.

^ "A celebration between two celebrities". Daily News (Sri Lanka). 19 October 2002.

^ "Keeping in touch with the French". Sunday Times (Sri Lanka). 19 October 1997. ISSN 1391-0531.

^ "Gehenu Lamai (1977)". Hollywood.com. 12 January 2008. Archived from the original on 16 May 2007.

^ "Achievements". (lesternsumitra.com). 12 January 2008.

External links

Female genius behind the camera

Official Website of Lester James Peries in association with Ministry of Cultural Affairs, Sri Lanka

v

t

e

Sinhala cinema

Sinhala language

Cinema of Sri Lanka

Actors 
Alexander Fernando

Alfred Edirimanne

Alston Koch

Amarasiri Kalansuriya

Amila Abeysekara

Ananda Weerakoon

Ananda Wickramage

Annesley Dias

Anthony C. Perera

Anton Jude

Arjuna Kamalanath

Asela Jayakody

Ashan Dias

Asoka Peiris

Asoka Ponnamperuma

Bandu Samarasinghe

Bandu Munasinghe

Bandula Vithanage

Baptist Fernando

Bertram Fernando

Berty Gunathilake

B. A. W. Jayamanne

B. S. Perera

Bimal Jayakody

Buddhadasa Vithanarachchi

Chandika Nanayakkara

Chandrasiri Kodithuwakku

Channa Perera

Christy Leonard Perera

Cletus Mendis

Cyril Wickramage

Darshan Dharmaraj

Dasun Pathirana

David Dharmakeerthi

Daya Alwis

Daya Thennakoon

Dhananjaya Siriwardena

Dharmapriya Dias

D.B. Gangodathenna

D. R. Nanayakkara

Dommie Jayawardena

Don Sirisena

Douglas Ranasinghe

Eddie Jayamanne

Eddie Junior

Freddie Silva

Gamini Fonseka

Gamini Hettiarachchi

G. R. Perera

Gemunu Wijesuriya

Gihan Fernando

Giriraj Kaushalya

Granville Rodrigo

H. A. Perera

Hemal Ranasinghe

Hemasiri Liyanage

Henry Jayasena

H.R. Jothipala

Hugo Fernando

Isuru Lokuhettiarachchi

Jackson Anthony

Jagath Benaragama

Jagath Chamila

Janak Premalal

Janaka Kumbukage

Jayalal Rohana

Jayalath Manoratne

Jayasekara Aponso

Jeewan Kumaranatunga

Joe Abeywickrama

Kamal Addaraarachchi

Kamal Deshapriya

Kumara Thirimadura

Lakshman Mendis

Lal Kularatne

Linton Semage

Lionel Deraniyagala

Lucien Bulathsinhala

Lucky Dias

Madhumadhawa Aravinda

Mahendra Perera

Mahinda Pathirage

Mark Samson

Martin Gunadasa

Menaka Rajapakse

Mervyn Jayathunga

Mervyn Silva

Mihira Sirithilaka

M. V. Balan

Nalin Pradeep Udawela

Nihal Silva

Palitha Silva

Piyadasa Wijekoon

Prem Jayanth

Priyankara Rathnayake

Priyantha Seneviratne

Pubudu Chathuranga

Raja Sumanapala

Rajitha Hiran

Rangana Premaratne

Ranjan Ramanayake

Ravindra Randeniya

Ravindra Rupasena

Ravindra Yasas

Rex Kodippili

Robin Fernando

Rodney Warnakula

Roger Seneviratne

Ronnie Leitch

Roshan Pilapitiya

Roshan Ranawana

Roshan Ravindra

Sahan Ranwala

Sampath Tennakoon

Sanath Gunathilake

Sanath Wimalasiri

Saranga Disasekara

Sarath Chandrasiri

Sarath Kothalawala

Sathischandra Edirisinghe

Saumya Liyanage

Shesha Palihakkara

Shyam Fernando

Srinath Maddumage

Sriyantha Mendis

Somasiri Dehipitiya

Somy Rathnayake

Srilal Abeykoon

Suminda Sirisena

Sunil Hettiarachchi

Suraj Mapa

Teddy Vidyalankara

Tennyson Cooray

Thilak Kumara Rathnayake

Thumindu Dodantenna

Thusitha Laknath

Tissa Wijesurendra

Tony Ranasinghe

Udara Rathnayake

Uddika Premarathna

Vijaya Kumaranatunga

Vijaya Nandasiri

Wally Nanayakkara

Wasantha Dukgannarala

Wasantha Kumaravila

Wickrama Bogoda

Wijeratne Warakagoda

Wimal Kumara de Costa

Wilson Gunaratne

Wilson Karunaratne

W. Jayasiri

Actresses 
Anarkali Akarsha

Anoja Weerasinghe

Anoma Janadari

Anula Karunathilaka

Anusha Damayanthi

Chandani Seneviratne

Chandra Kaluarachchi

Chathurika Peiris

Chitra Wakishta

Damayanthi Fonseka

Damitha Abeyratne

Damitha Saluwadana

Denawaka Hamine

Deepani Silva

Devika Mihirani

Dilani Abeywardana

Dilhani Ekanayake

Dinakshie Priyasad

Dulani Anuradha

Duleeka Marapana

Edna Sugathapala

Florida Jayalath

Gayathri Dias

Geetha Kanthi Jayakody

Geetha Kumarasinghe

Gemini Kantha

Himali Sayurangi

Himali Siriwardena

Iranganie Serasinghe

Jacqueline Fernandez

Jayani Senanayake

Jeevarani Kurukulasuriya

Kanchana Mendis

Kaushalya Fernando

Kusum Renu

Leena de Silva

Leticia Peiris

Lilian Edirisinghe

Malini Fonseka

Manel Wanaguru

Manike Attanayake

Maureen Charuni

Menik Kurukulasuriya

Mercy Edirisinghe

Michelle Dilhara

Miyuri Samarasinghe

Nadeeka Gunasekara

Nayanathara Wickramaarachchi

Nehara Peiris

Nethalie Nanayakkara

Nilmini Tennakoon

Nilmini Buwaneka

Niranjani Shanmugaraja

Nita Fernando

Paboda Sandeepani

Pearl Vasudevi

Punya Heendeniya

Rathna Lalani Jayakody

Rathna Sumanapala

Rathnawali Kekunawela

Rebeka Nirmali

Ruby de Mel

Rukmani Devi

Sabeetha Perera

Sachini Ayendra

Samanalee Fonseka

Sangeetha Weeraratne

Sanoja Bibile

Seetha Kumari

Semini Iddamalgoda

Shalani Tharaka

Shanthi Lekha

Shanudrie Priyasad

Sheshadri Priyasad

Shyama Ananda

Sirimathi Rasadari

Sonia Disa

Sriyani Amarasena

Sujani Menaka

Sumana Amarasinghe

Susantha Chandramali

Susila Kottage

Susila Kuragama

Suvineetha Weerasinghe

Swarna Mallawarachchi

Thesara Jayawardane

Thisuri Yuwanika

Trilicia Gunawardena

Udari Perera

Udari Warnakulasooriya

Umali Thilakarathne

Umayangana Wickramasinghe

Upeksha Swarnamali

Vasanthi Chathurani

Veena Jayakody

Vijitha Mallika

Vinu Udani Siriwardhana

Yashoda Wimaladharma

Yureni Noshika

Filmmakers 
Asoka Handagama

B. A. W. Jayamanne

Boodee Keerthisena

Chandran Rutnam

Daya Wimalaweera

D. B. Nihalsinghe

Dharmasena Pathiraja

Gamini Fonseka

H. D. Premaratne

Jackson Anthony

Jayantha Chandrasiri

K.A.W. Perera

Lester James Peries

Mahagama Sekara

Malaka Dewapriya

M. S. Ananda

Nalaka Vithanage

Parakrama Niriella

Prasanna Jayakody

Prasanna Vithanage

Priyantha Colombage

Roy de Silva

Sanjeewa Pushpakumara

Siri Gunasinghe

Sirisena Wimalaweera

Somaratne Dissanayake

Sugathapala Senarath Yapa

Sumana Amarasinghe

Sumitra Peries

Sunil Ariyaratne

Tissa Abeysekara

Udayakantha Warnasuriya

Vasantha Obeysekera

Vimukthi Jayasundara

Yasapalitha Nanayakkara

Film music composers 
WD Amaradeva

Ananda Samarakoon

Bathiya and Santhush

Clarence Wijewardane

Dinesh Subasinghe

Gunadasa Kapuge

Hugo Fernando

Kasun Kalhara

Lakshman Joseph de Saram

Lionel Ranwala

Marcelline Jayakody

Mohammed Gauss

Nanda Malini

Premasiri Khemadasa

Rohana Weerasinghe

Rookantha Gunathilake

Sarath Dassanayake

Shelton Perera

Shihan Mihiranga Bennet

Somapala Rathnayake

Stanley Peiris

Sunil Santha

Victor Rathnayake

W.B. Makuloluwa
