"American singer-songwriter, record producer, and actress

This article is about the singer-songwriter. For her self-titled album, see Taylor Swift (album).

Taylor Swift

Swift at the 2019 American Music Awards

Born Taylor Alison Swift

(1989-12-13) December 13, 1989 (age 30)

West Reading, Pennsylvania, U.S.

Other names Nils Sjöberg

Occupation 
Singer-songwriter

record producer

actress

music video director

philanthropist

businesswoman

Years active 2003–present

Net worth $360 million (2019 estimate)

Relatives Austin Swift (brother)

Awards Full list

Musical career

Origin Nashville, Tennessee, U.S.

Genres 
Pop

country

rock

synth-pop

country pop

indie folk

Instruments 
Vocals

guitar

piano

banjo

ukulele

Labels 
Big Machine

Republic

Associated acts 
Ed Sheeran

Website taylorswift.com

Taylor Alison Swift (born December 13, 1989) is an American singer-songwriter. Her narrative songwriting, which often centers around her personal life, has received widespread critical praise and media coverage. Born in West Reading, Pennsylvania, Swift relocated to Nashville, Tennessee in 2004 to pursue a career in music. At age 14, she became the youngest artist signed by the Sony/ATV Music publishing house and, at age 15, she signed her first record deal. Her 2006 eponymous debut studio album was the longest-charting album of the 2000s on the Billboard 200. Its third single, "Our Song", made her the youngest person to single-handedly write and perform a number-one song on the Billboard Country Airplay chart. Swift's breakthrough second studio album, Fearless (2008), won four Grammy Awards and produced the pop-crossover hit singles "Love Story" and "You Belong with Me". It became the best-selling album of 2009 in the United States and was certified Diamond by the RIAA.

Swift's self-written third studio album, Speak Now (2010), spawned the Grammy-winning single "Mean", and her cross-genre fourth studio album, Red (2012), earned Swift her first Billboard Hot 100 number-one single, "We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together". Her fifth studio album and first all-pop project, 1989 (2014), produced the number-one singles "Shake It Off", "Blank Space" and "Bad Blood", and won three Grammy Awards—including Album of the Year—making Swift the first woman to succeed herself at the top spot on the Hot 100 and the first woman to win Album of the Year twice as lead artist. Her hip hop-influenced sixth studio album, Reputation (2017), made her the first and only act in music history to have four albums each sell one million copies in their first week in the U.S. and generated her fifth Hot 100 number-one single, "Look What You Made Me Do". Her seventh studio album, Lover (2019), broke the record for the most simultaneous Hot 100 entries by a female artist and became the best-selling studio album of 2019. Swift's eighth studio album, Folklore (2020), was announced less than one day before its release and marked a departure from pop in favor of indie folk and alternative rock.

Having sold more than 50 million albums and 150 million singles globally, Swift is one of the world's best-selling music artists. Her accolades include 10 Grammy Awards, an Emmy Award, and seven Guinness World Records; she is the most-awarded act and woman at the American Music Awards (29 wins) and Billboard Music Awards (23 wins), respectively. She has been included in multiple power rankings, such as Time's annual list of the 100 most influential people in the world (2010, 2015 and 2019), Rolling Stone's 100 Greatest Songwriters of All Time (2015), the Forbes Celebrity 100 (placing first in 2016 and 2019), and Billboard's Greatest of All Time Artists Chart (placing eighth). She was named Global Recording Artist of the Year twice by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (2014 and 2019), Woman of the Decade (2010s) by Billboard and the Artist of the Decade (2010s) by the American Music Awards.

Contents

1 Life and career

1.1 1989–2003: Early life

1.2 2004–2008: Career beginnings and Taylor Swift

1.3 2008–2010: Fearless and acting

1.4 2010–2014: Speak Now and Red

1.5 2014–2017: 1989

1.6 2017–2019: Reputation

1.7 2019–present: Lover and Folklore

2 Artistry

2.1 Influences

2.2 Musical style

2.3 Songwriting

2.4 Music videos

3 Public image

4 Impact

5 Awards and achievements

6 Other ventures

6.1 Philanthropy

6.2 Politics and activism

6.3 Product endorsements

7 Discography

8 Filmography

9 Tours

10 See also

11 Footnotes

12 References

13 External links

Life and career

1989–2003: Early life

Taylor Alison Swift was born on December 13, 1989, in West Reading, Pennsylvania. Her father, Scott Kingsley Swift, is a former stockbroker for Merrill Lynch; her mother, Andrea Gardner Swift (née Finlay), is a former homemaker who previously worked as a mutual fund marketing executive. Swift, who said she has Scottish heritage, was named after the singer-songwriter James Taylor. Her younger brother, Austin Kingsley Swift, is an actor. Swift spent her early years on a Christmas tree farm that her father purchased from one of his clients. Swift identifies as Christian. She attended preschool and kindergarten at the Alvernia Montessori School, run by the Bernadine Franciscan sisters, before transferring to The Wyndcroft School. The family moved to a rented house in the suburban town of Wyomissing, Pennsylvania, where she attended Wyomissing Area Junior/Senior High School.

At age nine, Swift became interested in musical theater and performed in four Berks Youth Theatre Academy productions. She also traveled regularly to New York City for vocal and acting lessons. Swift later shifted her focus toward country music, inspired by Shania Twain's songs, which made her "want to just run around the block four times and daydream about everything." She spent weekends performing at local festivals and events. After watching a documentary about Faith Hill, Swift felt sure she needed to move to Nashville, Tennessee, to pursue a career in music. She traveled with her mother at age eleven to visit Nashville record labels and submitted demo tapes of Dolly Parton and Dixie Chicks karaoke covers. She was rejected, however, because "everyone in that town wanted to do what I wanted to do. So, I kept thinking to myself, I need to figure out a way to be different."

When Swift was around 12 years old, computer repairman and local musician Ronnie Cremer taught her to play guitar. He helped with her first efforts as a songwriter, leading to her write "Lucky You". In 2003, Swift and her parents started working with New York-based talent manager Dan Dymtrow. With his help, Swift modeled for Abercrombie & Fitch as part of their "Rising Stars" campaign, had an original song included on a Maybelline compilation CD, and attended meetings with major record labels. After performing original songs at an RCA Records showcase, Swift was given an artist development deal and began making frequent trips to Nashville with her mother.

To help Swift break into country music, her father transferred to Merrill Lynch's Nashville office when she was 14 years old, and the family relocated to a lakefront house in Hendersonville, Tennessee. Swift attended Hendersonville High School but transferred to the Aaron Academy after two years, which could better accommodate her touring schedule through homeschooling; she graduated a year early.

2004–2008: Career beginnings and Taylor Swift

In Nashville, Swift worked with experienced Music Row songwriters such as Troy Verges, Brett Beavers, Brett James, Mac McAnally, and the Warren Brothers, and formed a lasting working relationship with Liz Rose. They began meeting for two-hour writing sessions every Tuesday afternoon after school. Rose thought the sessions were "some of the easiest I've ever done. Basically, I was just her editor. She'd write about what happened in school that day. She had such a clear vision of what she was trying to say. And she'd come in with the most incredible hooks." Swift became the youngest artist signed by the Sony/ATV Tree publishing house but left the Sony-owned RCA Records at the age of 14. She later said: "I genuinely felt that I was running out of time. I wanted to capture these years of my life on an album while they still represented what I was going through."

Swift performing at Yahoo! headquarters in Sunnyvale, California, in 2007

At an industry showcase at Nashville's Bluebird Cafe in 2005, Swift caught the attention of Scott Borchetta, a DreamWorks Records executive who was preparing to form an independent record label, Big Machine Records. She had first met Borchetta in 2004. Swift became one of Big Machine's first signings, and her father purchased a three-percent stake in the company for an estimated $120,000. She began working on her eponymous debut album shortly after. Swift persuaded Big Machine to hire her demo producer Nathan Chapman, with whom she felt she had the right "chemistry". She wrote three of the album's songs alone, and co-wrote the remaining eight with Rose, Robert Ellis Orrall, Brian Maher, and Angelo Petraglia. Taylor Swift was released on October 24, 2006. Jon Caramanica of The New York Times described it as "a small masterpiece of pop-minded country, both wide-eyed and cynical, held together by Ms. Swift's firm, pleading voice." Taylor Swift peaked at number five on the Billboard 200 albums chart in the United States, spending 157 weeks there—the longest stay on the chart by any release in the U.S. that decade. As of August 2016, the album had sold over 7.75 million copies worldwide.

Big Machine Records was still in its infancy during the June 2006 release of the lead single, "Tim McGraw". Swift and her mother helped "stuff the CD singles into envelopes to send to radio." She spent much of 2006 promoting Taylor Swift with a radio tour, television appearances, and opening for Rascal Flatts on select dates during their 2006 tour after they fired their previous opening act, Eric Church, for playing longer than his allotted time. Church jokingly told Swift she should give him her first gold record as thanks for getting fired. She sent him her first gold record with a note that said, "Thanks for playing too long and too loud on the Flatts tour. I sincerely appreciate it. Taylor."

Borchetta said that although record industry peers initially disapproved of his signing a 16-year-old singer-songwriter, Swift tapped into a previously unknown market—teenage girls who listen to country music. Following "Tim McGraw", four more singles were released throughout 2007 and 2008: "Teardrops on My Guitar", "Our Song", "Picture to Burn" and "Should've Said No". All were successful on Billboard's Hot Country Songs chart in the United States, with "Our Song", and "Should've Said No" reaching number one. With "Our Song", Swift became the youngest person to single-handedly write and perform a number-one song on the chart. "Teardrops on My Guitar" reached number thirteen on the Billboard Hot 100 songs chart in the United States. Swift also released the holiday album Sounds of the Season: The Taylor Swift Holiday Collection in October 2007 and the EP Beautiful Eyes in July 2008. She promoted her debut album extensively as the opening act for other artists on their tours.

Swift won accolades for Taylor Swift. She was one of the recipients of the Nashville Songwriters Association's Songwriter/Artist of the Year in 2007, becoming the youngest person to be honored with the title. She also won the Country Music Association's Horizon Award for Best New Artist, the Academy of Country Music Awards' Top New Female Vocalist, and the American Music Awards' Favorite Country Female Artist honor. She was also nominated for Best New Artist at the 50th Annual Grammy Awards. She opened for the Rascal Flatts on their 2008 summer and fall tour. In July of that year, Swift began a romance with singer Joe Jonas that ended three months later.

2008–2010: Fearless and acting

Swift's second studio album, Fearless, was released on November 11, 2008. The lead single, "Love Story", was released in September 2008. It peaked at number four on the Billboard Hot 100 and number one in Australia. Four more singles were released throughout 2008 and 2009: "White Horse", "You Belong with Me", "Fifteen" and "Fearless". "You Belong with Me" was the album's highest-charting single on the Billboard Hot 100, peaking at number two. The album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 and was the top-selling album of 2009 in the United States. Swift's first concert tour, the Fearless Tour, promoted the album and grossed over $63 million. Journey to Fearless, a three-part documentary miniseries, was aired on television and later released on DVD and Blu-ray. Swift also performed as a supporting act for Keith Urban's Escape Together World Tour.

Pictured at the premiere of Hannah Montana: The Movie, Swift had a cameo appearance in the film and recorded two songs for its soundtrack.

In 2009, the music video for "You Belong with Me" was named Best Female Video at the MTV Video Music Awards. Her acceptance speech was interrupted by rapper Kanye West, an incident that became the subject of controversy, widespread media attention, and many Internet memes. James Montgomery of MTV argued the incident and subsequent media attention turned Swift into "a bona-fide mainstream celebrity". That year she won five American Music Awards, including Artist of the Year and Favorite Country Album. Billboard named her 2009's Artist of the Year. The album ranked number 99 on NPR's 2017 list of the 150 Greatest Albums Made By Women.

At the 52nd Annual Grammy Awards, Fearless was named Album of the Year and Best Country Album, and "White Horse" was named Best Country Song and Best Female Country Vocal Performance. Swift was the youngest artist to win Album of the Year. During the ceremony, Swift sang "You Belong with Me" and "Rhiannon" with Stevie Nicks, a performance that received negative reviews and caused media backlash. Jon Caramanica of The New York Times found it "refreshing to see someone so gifted make the occasional flub" and described Swift as "the most important new pop star of the past few years". Swift became the youngest artist to be named Entertainer of the Year by the Country Music Association (CMA). Fearless also won the CMA Album of the Year Award.

Swift contributed backing vocals to John Mayer's "Half of My Heart", a single from his fourth album, Battle Studies (2009). She co-wrote and recorded "Best Days of Your Life" with Kellie Pickler, and co-wrote two songs for the Hannah Montana: The Movie soundtrack—"You'll Always Find Your Way Back Home" and "Crazier". Swift also provided vocals for Boys Like Girls' "Two Is Better Than One". She contributed two songs to the Valentine's Day soundtrack, including the country-pop song "Today Was a Fairytale", which became her first number one on the Canadian Hot 100 chart and her second number-two peaking song in the U.S. While filming her cinematic debut Valentine's Day in October 2009, Swift began a romantic relationship with co-star Taylor Lautner; they broke up later that year. The romantic comedy, released in 2010, saw her play the ditzy girlfriend of a high school jock, a role which the Los Angeles Times felt showed Swift had "serious comedic potential". On the other hand, in a scathing review, a critic for Variety deemed her "entirely undirected", arguing "she needs to find a skilled director to tamp her down and channel her obviously abundant energy".

Swift made her TV acting debut in a 2009 episode of CBS's CSI: Crime Scene Investigation, playing a rebellious teenager. The New York Times noted the character allowed Swift to be "a little bit naughty, and credibly so". Later that year, Swift both hosted and performed as the musical guest on an episode of Saturday Night Live and was the first host to write their own opening monologue. Entertainment Weekly described her as "this season's best Saturday Night Live host so far", noting she "was always up for the challenge, seemed to be having fun, and helped the rest of the cast nail the punchlines".

2010–2014: Speak Now and Red

In August 2010, Swift released "Mine", the lead single from her third studio album, Speak Now. It entered the U.S. charts at number three, making Swift the second female artist in the history of the Hot 100 (after Mariah Carey) to debut multiple tracks in the top five in one year; the other was "Today Was a Fairytale" at number two. Swift wrote the album alone and co-produced every track. Speak Now, released on October 25, 2010, was a commercial success, debuting at number one on the Billboard 200, and becoming the 16th album in chart history to achieve opening week sales of one million copies. It became the fastest-selling digital album by a female artist, with 278,000 downloads in a week, earning Swift an entry in the 2010 Guinness World Records. She earned a second entry after she became the first woman to achieve 10 track debuts on the Billboard Hot 100. Three of the album's singles, "Mine", "Back to December", and "Mean", peaked in the top ten in Canada, while in the U.S., the earlier two along with the title track peaked in the top 10 of the Hot 100 chart. Later in 2010, she briefly dated actor Jake Gyllenhaal.

"Mean" won Best Country Song and Best Country Solo Performance at the 54th Annual Grammy Awards. Swift performed it during the ceremony. Claire Suddath of Time felt she "delivered her comeback on-key and with a vengeance"; Jayme Deerwester of USA Today wrote that the criticism in 2010 seemed to have "made her a better songwriter and live performer". Swift won other awards for Speak Now, including Songwriter/Artist of the Year by the Nashville Songwriters Association (2010 and 2011), Woman of the Year by Billboard (2011), and Entertainer of the Year by the Academy of Country Music (2011 and 2012) and the Country Music Association in 2011. At the American Music Awards of 2011, Swift won Artist of the Year and Favorite Country Album. Rolling Stone placed Speak Now at number 45 in its 2012 list of the "50 Best Female Albums of All Time", writing: "She might get played on the country station, but she's one of the few genuine rock stars we've got these days, with a flawless ear for what makes a song click."

Swift performing during the Speak Now World Tour in 2012

The Speak Now World Tour ran from February 2011 to March 2012 and grossed over $123 million. In November 2011, Swift released her first live album, Speak Now World Tour: Live. The following month, she contributed two original songs to The Hunger Games soundtrack album: "Safe & Sound", co-written and recorded with the Civil Wars and T-Bone Burnett, and "Eyes Open". "Safe & Sound" won the Grammy Award for Best Song Written for Visual Media and was also nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song. Swift contributed vocals to rapper B.o.B's "Both of Us", released in May 2012. From July to September 2012, Swift dated political heir Conor Kennedy. In August, Swift released "We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together", the lead single from her fourth studio album, Red. It became her first number one in the U.S. and New Zealand and reached the top slot on iTunes' digital song sales chart 50 minutes after its release, earning the Fastest Selling Single in Digital History Guinness World Record. Swift released the album's second single, "Begin Again", in October. It reached number seven on the Billboard Hot 100. Other singles released from the album include "I Knew You Were Trouble", "22", "Everything Has Changed", "The Last Time", and "Red". "I Knew You Were Trouble" was a major commercial success, peaking at number two in the United States.

Red was released on October 22, 2012, incorporating new genres for Swift, such as heartland rock, dubstep and dance-pop. The album was a critical and commercial success and debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 1.21 million copies. This marked the highest opening sales in a decade in the United States, and made Swift the first female to have two million-selling album openings, a record recognized by the Guinness World Records. The Red Tour ran from March 2013 to June 2014 and grossed over $150 million; it broke the ticket sales record in China with all 18,000 tickets sold in 60 seconds. Red earned several accolades, including four nominations at the 56th Annual Grammy Awards. Its single "I Knew You Were Trouble" won Best Female Video at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards. Swift was named Best Female Country Artist at the 2012 American Music Awards and Artist of the Year at the 2013 ceremony. She received the Nashville Songwriters Association's Songwriter/Artist Award for the fifth and sixth consecutive years in 2012 and 2013. Swift was also honored by the Association with a special Pinnacle Award, making her the second recipient of the accolade after Garth Brooks. During this time, she had a short-term relationship with British singer Harry Styles.

In 2013, Swift co-wrote and co-produced "Sweeter than Fiction" with Jack Antonoff for the One Chance film soundtrack and received a Best Original Song nomination at the 71st Golden Globe Awards. She provided guest vocals for Tim McGraw's song "Highway Don't Care", featuring guitar work by Keith Urban. Swift performed "As Tears Go By" with the Rolling Stones in Chicago, Illinois, as part of their 50 & Counting tour, and said that the band was a major influence on her career outlook. She also joined Florida Georgia Line on stage during their set at the 2013 Country Radio Seminar to sing "Cruise". Swift voiced Audrey, a tree lover, in the animated film The Lorax (2012), made a cameo in the sitcom New Girl (2013), and had a supporting role in the film adaptation of The Giver (2014).

2014–2017: 1989

In March 2014, Swift relocated to New York City. Around this time, she was working on her fifth studio album, 1989, with co-writers Antonoff, Max Martin, Shellback, Imogen Heap, Ryan Tedder, and Ali Payami. She promoted the album through various campaigns, including inviting fans to secret album-listening sessions. Credited as her "first documented, official pop album", it marked a departure from her country albums. The album was released on October 27, 2014, to positive reviews.

Swift performing during the 1989 World Tour, the highest-grossing tour of 2015

1989 sold 1.28 million copies in the U.S. during the first week of its release and debuted atop the Billboard 200. This made Swift the first act to have three albums sell more than one million copies in their opening week, for which she earned another Guinness World Record. By the end of 2014, she became the first act since The Beatles to have four consecutive studio albums log at least six weeks atop the Billboard 200. As of June 2017, 1989 had sold over 10 million copies worldwide. The lead single, "Shake It Off", was released in August 2014 and debuted at number one on the Billboard Hot 100. The album generated two additional number-one singles—"Blank Space" and "Bad Blood (featuring Kendrick Lamar)"—as well as the top-ten entries "Style" and "Wildest Dreams", and other singles "Out of the Woods" and "New Romantics". "Shake It Off", "Blank Space", and "Bad Blood" also topped the charts in Australia and Canada. After "Blank Space" reached number one in the U.S. immediately following "Shake It Off", Swift became the first woman in Hot 100 history to succeed herself at the top spot. The music video for "Blank Space" was briefly the fastest video to reach one billion views on Vevo. The video for "Bad Blood" broke Vevo's 24-hour viewing record and won Video of the Year and Best Collaboration at the 2015 MTV Video Music Awards. The 1989 World Tour ran from May to December 2015, grossed over $250 million, broke a number of touring records, and was highest-grossing tour of the year.

Swift was named Billboard's Woman of the Year in 2014, becoming the first artist to win the award twice. That year she also received the Dick Clark Award for Excellence at the American Music Awards. In 2015, Swift won the Brit Award for International Female Solo Artist. Swift was one of eight artists to receive a 50th Anniversary Milestone Award at the 2015 Academy of Country Music Awards. In 2016, she won three Grammy Awards for 1989—Album of the Year, Best Pop Vocal Album, and Best Music Video for "Bad Blood". She became the first woman and fifth act overall to win the first of these twice as a lead artist, as well as the first act to do so with albums of different genres. In March 2015, she started dating Scottish DJ and record producer Calvin Harris, and by June, they were ranked as the highest-paid celebrity couple over the past year by Forbes with combined earnings of over $146 million. After Swift and Harris announced the end of their relationship in June 2016, the song they had written together, "This Is What You Came For", which featured vocals from Rihanna, was released to international success. Swift was initially credited under the pseudonym Nils Sjöberg. The same month, Swift began dating English actor Tom Hiddleston, whom she met at the Met Gala event she co-chaired that year; the relationship ended several months later. In August, Swift addressed her mother's cancer diagnosis and encouraged others to get medical checkups. In 2016, Swift's intellectual property rights management and holding company, TAS Rights Management, filed for 73 trademarks related to Swift and the 1989 era memes. That September, she began dating British actor Joe Alwyn. In October, Little Big Town released "Better Man", written solely by Swift, for their seventh album, The Breaker. The song earned Swift an award for Song of the Year at the 51st CMA Awards. Two months later, Swift and British singer Zayn Malik released a single together called "I Don't Wanna Live Forever" for the soundtrack of the film Fifty Shades Darker (2017). The song reached number one in Sweden and number two in the United States. At the 2017 MTV Video Music Awards, the duo won the award for Best Collaboration for the song's music video.

2017–2019: Reputation

In August 2017, Swift successfully sued David Mueller, a former morning show personality for Denver's KYGO-FM. Four years earlier, Swift had informed Mueller's bosses that he had sexually assaulted her by groping her at an event. After being fired, Mueller accused Swift of lying and sued her for damages from his loss of employment. Shortly after, Swift counter-sued for sexual assault for a dollar. The jury rejected Mueller's claims and ruled in favor of Swift. Swift thereafter cleared her social media accounts and then released "Look What You Made Me Do" as the lead single from her sixth album, Reputation. The song topped the charts in Australia, Ireland, New Zealand, the UK, and the U.S. Its music video had over 43.2 million views during its first day on YouTube, breaking the site's record for the most-viewed music video in 24 hours. In October, Swift released the album's second single "...Ready for It?", which charted at number three in Australia and at number four in the U.S.

Swift performing during her Reputation Stadium Tour (2018).

Two promotional singles were released from Reputation, "Gorgeous" and "Call It What You Want". "Gorgeous" later became the album's fifth single in Europe. The album was released in November and sold 1.21 million copies in the United States, becoming the country's top-selling album in 2017. With this achievement, she became the first act to have four albums sell one million copies within one week in the U.S. The album topped the charts in several countries, including the U.S., UK, Australia, and Canada. First-week worldwide sales amounted to two million copies. Reputation saw Swift take a new direction, musically; the album is noted for its more urban sound and hip hop and EDM influences.
Later that month, Swift performed "...Ready for It?" and "Call It What You Want" on Saturday Night Live. "End Game", featuring Ed Sheeran and rapper Future, followed in November as the third single and peaked at number 18 in the U.S. Other singles from the album include "New Year's Day", released exclusively to country radio, and sleeper hit "Delicate".

In April 2018, Swift featured on Sugarland's "Babe" from their album Bigger. In support of Reputation, she embarked on her critically acclaimed Reputation Stadium Tour from May to November 2018. The tour broke multiple venue attendance and gross earnings records in the U.S., taking in $266.1 million and selling more than two million tickets. Swift broke her own record for the highest-grossing domestic tour by a woman, as well as the record for the highest-grossing North American concert tour in history. Worldwide, the tour grossed $345.7 million, making it the second highest-grossing concert tour of the year. At the American Music Awards of 2018, Swift won Tour of the Year, Artist of the Year, Favorite Pop/Rock Female Artist, and Favorite Pop/Rock Album for Reputation. With a total of 23 awards, she became the most awarded female winner in AMA history, a record previously held by Whitney Houston.

Reputation was Swift's last album under her 12-year contract with Big Machine Records. In November 2018, she signed a new multi-album deal with Big Machine's distributor Universal Music Group; in the U.S., her subsequent releases were promoted under the Republic Records imprint. Swift said the contract included a provision for her to maintain ownership of her master recordings. In addition, in the event that Universal sells any part of its stake in Spotify, Spotify agreed to distribute a non-recoupable portion of the proceeds among their artists. In late November, Big Machine Records released a Reputation Stadium Tour playlist for streaming services. The playlist includes every song performed on B-stages during the Reputation Stadium Tour. On December 31, Reputation Stadium Tour, a concert film, was released on Netflix to critical acclaim.

2019–present: Lover and Folklore

In April 2019, Swift released "Me!", featuring Brendon Urie of Panic! at the Disco as the lead single from her seventh studio album, Lover. The song debuted at number 100 on the Billboard Hot 100 three days after its release and jumped to number two the following week—the biggest single-week jump in chart history. The music video for "Me!" broke the overall female and Vevo 24-hour viewing record, amassing 65.2 million views within its first day of release. However, the song received mixed reviews and Swift removed a "much-maligned" lyric of the song from the album. In June, she released the second single "You Need to Calm Down", which debuted and peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot 100, marking her 15th top 10 debut, the most among women. In July, she released a promotional single from the album, "The Archer". The title track, the album's third single, became her third consecutive Hot 100 top-10 single from the album.

Swift at the 2019 iHeartRadio Music Awards

Lover was released on August 23 to positive reviews and debuted atop the Billboard 200 with a first-week tally of 867,000 units, including 679,000 copies sold, making Swift the first female artist in history to have six albums sell more than 500,000 copies in a single week. It also sold more copies than the other 199 albums on the chart combined that week. The album's 18 songs all entered the Billboard Hot 100, setting a new record for the most simultaneous chart entries for a female artist. At the 2019 MTV Video Music Awards, the videos for "Me!" and "You Need to Calm Down" received twelve nominations. "Me!" won Best Visual Effects, and "You Need to Calm Down" won Video of the Year—making Swift the first female and second artist overall to win the award for a video that they co-directed—and Video for Good. Swift was the opening performer at the award ceremony. By the end of 2019, Lover became the year's best-selling physical album in the U.S. and the best-selling album by a female artist worldwide. Swift was named the global best-selling artist of the year by the IFPI and became the first woman to win the honor twice, having previously won in 2014.

In June 2019, Big Machine Records, Swift's former record label, was acquired by talent manager Scooter Braun, a purchase that included the masters for her first six studio albums. In a Tumblr post, Swift sharply criticized the transaction, stating she had been trying to buy the masters for years, and described Braun as an "incessant, manipulative bully". In August, Swift announced plans to rerecord the albums in November 2020. In November, Swift said that Braun and Big Machine founder Scott Borchetta had blocked her from performing her older songs at the 2019 American Music Awards and from using older material for her Netflix documentary Miss Americana. Big Machine denied both allegations and said it was owed "millions of dollars and multiple assets" by Swift. In response, Swift's representatives released correspondence showing a Big Machine executive refusing to grant licenses for the documentary, and stated that Big Machine owed Swift nearly $8 million in unpaid royalties. On November 18, Big Machine issued a statement saying it had "agreed to grant all licenses of their artists' performances to stream post show and for re-broadcast on mutually approved platforms" for the American Music Awards, though it did not mention Swift by name. Swift won six American Music Awards that year, including Artist of the Decade for the 2010s. In April 2020, Big Machine released Live from Clear Channel Stripped 2008, a live album of a 2008 radio show performance. Swift said she did not authorize the release.

In November 2019, Swift was included on Billboard's Greatest of All Time Artists Chart at number eight, the highest placement for an act that debuted in the 21st century. That same month, she released an original song she wrote with Andrew Lloyd Webber titled "Beautiful Ghosts" for the film Cats (2019). In December, she composed, recorded, and released a Christmas single, "Christmas Tree Farm", and played Bombalurina in the film adaptation of Lloyd Webber's musical Cats. Although critics reviewed the film negatively, many noted Swift's brief role. On January 23, Miss Americana premiered at the 2020 Sundance Film Festival and was released on Netflix on January 31 to positive reviews. The documentary includes the song "Only the Young", which Swift wrote after the 2018 United States elections. In February 2020, Swift signed an exclusive global publishing deal with Universal Music Publishing Group, after her sixteen-year-old contract with Sony/ATV Music Publishing expired. That month, she released a live version of Lover song, "The Man" and its music video. Lover Fest, Swift's concert tour in support of the album, was postponed to 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Footage from Swift's 2019 City of Lover concert in Paris aired on ABC on May 17, 2020, and was made available for streaming on Hulu and Disney+ the next day. Swift also released live versions of the Lover album tracks she performed at the one-off Paris concert after the television special's premiere. She made special appearances on YouTube's Dear Class of 2020 livestream on June 7, 2020 and on Pride Live's Stonewall Day livestream event on June 26, 2020. 

On July 24, Swift released her eighth studio album, Folklore, which was announced less than 24 hours before. Written and recorded while Swift was in isolation due to COVID-19, the album included musical collaborations with Bon Iver, Aaron Dessner, and Antonoff.

Artistry

Influences

One of Swift's earliest musical memories is listening to her maternal grandmother, Marjorie Finlay, sing in church. As a child, she enjoyed Disney film soundtracks: "My parents noticed that, once I had run out of words, I would just make up my own". Swift has said she owes her confidence to her mother, who helped her prepare for class presentations as a child. She also attributes her "fascination with writing and storytelling" to her mother. Swift was drawn to the storytelling aspect of country music, and was introduced to the genre listening to "the great female country artists of the '90s"—Shania Twain, Faith Hill, and the Dixie Chicks." Twain, both as a songwriter and performer, was her biggest musical influence. Hill was Swift's childhood role model: "Everything she said, did, wore, I tried to copy it". She admired the Dixie Chicks' defiant attitude and their ability to play their own instruments. The band's "Cowboy Take Me Away" was the first song Swift learned to play on the guitar. Swift also explored the music of older country stars, including Patsy Cline, Loretta Lynn, Dolly Parton, and Tammy Wynette. She believes Parton is "an amazing example to every female songwriter out there". Alt-country artists like Ryan Adams, Patty Griffin and Lori McKenna have also inspired Swift.

Shania Twain (left) and Stevie Nicks (right) have influenced Swift.

Swift lists Paul McCartney, the Rolling Stones, Bruce Springsteen, Emmylou Harris, Kris Kristofferson, and Carly Simon as her career role models. Discussing McCartney and Harris, Swift has said, "They've taken chances, but they've also been the same artist for their entire careers". McCartney, both as a Beatle and a solo artist, makes Swift feel "as if I've been let into his heart and his mind  He's out there continuing to make his fans so happy. Any musician could only dream of a legacy like that." She likes Springsteen for being "so musically relevant after such a long period of time". She aspires to be like Harris as she grows older because of prioritizing music over fame. Swift says of Kristofferson that he "shines in songwriting", and admires Simon for being "an emotional" but "a strong person".

Swift has been influenced by other non-country artists. As a pre-teen, she enjoyed bubblegum pop acts including Hanson and Britney Spears, for whom Swift had an "unwavering devotion". In her high school years, she listened to emo-rock bands like Dashboard Confessional, Fall Out Boy, and Jimmy Eat World, and pop/R&B performers like Justin Timberlake, whom she called her "musical crush". Swift's fifth album, the pop-focused 1989, was influenced by some of her favorite 1980s pop acts, including Peter Gabriel, Annie Lennox, Phil Collins and "Like a Prayer-era Madonna". Discussing Madonna, Swift said: "One element of Madonna's career that really takes center stage is how many times she's reinvented herself. It's easier to stay in one look, one comfort zone, one musical style. It's inspiring to see someone whose only predictable quality is being unpredictable." Swift named Pete Wentz and Lana Del Rey as her favorite lyricists.

Musical style

Swift's Les Paul guitar and microphone in the Musical Instrument Museum of Phoenix

Swift's music contains elements of pop, synth-pop, country, country pop and rock. She described herself as a country artist until the 2014 release of 1989, which she characterized as a "sonically cohesive pop album". Rolling Stone wrote: " might get played on the country station, but she's one of the few genuine rock stars we've got these days." According to The New York Times, "There isn't much in Ms. Swift's music to indicate country—a few banjo strums, a pair of cowboy boots worn onstage, a bedazzled guitar—but there's something in her winsome, vulnerable delivery that's unique to Nashville." The Guardian wrote that Swift "cranks melodies out with the pitiless efficiency of a Scandinavian pop factory."

Swift's singing voice was described by Sophie Schillaci of The Hollywood Reporter as "sweet, but soft". The Los Angeles Times identified Swift's "defining" vocal gesture in studio recordings as "the line that slides down like a contented sigh or up like a raised eyebrow, giving her beloved girl-time hits their air of easy intimacy". Rolling Stone, in a Speak Now review, wrote: "Swift's voice is unaffected enough to mask how masterful she has become as a singer; she lowers her voice for the payoff lines in the classic mode of a shy girl trying to talk tough." In another review of Speak Now, The Village Voice wrote that her phrasing was previously "bland and muddled, but that's changed. She can still sound strained and thin, and often strays into a pitch that drives some people crazy; but she's learned how to make words sound like what they mean." NPR Music described her singing as personal and conversational thanks to her "exceptional gift for inflection", but also suffers from a "wobbly pitch and tight, nasal delivery". The Hollywood Reporter wrote that her live vocals are "fine", but they do not match those of her peers. Swift has been praised for refusing to correct her pitch with Auto-Tune.

In an interview with The New Yorker, Swift characterized herself primarily as a songwriter: "I write songs, and my voice is just a way to get those lyrics across." A writer for The Tennessean conceded in 2010 that Swift is "not the best technical singer", but described her as the "best communicator that we've got". Swift's vocal presence is something that concerns her and she has "put a lot of work" into improving it. It was reported in 2010 that she continues to take vocal lessons. She has said that she only feels nervous performing "if I'm not sure what the audience thinks of me, like at award shows".

Songwriting

Swift uses her life experiences as an inspiration in her work. She often addresses the "anonymous crushes of her high school years" and celebrities in her early songs. Swift frequently criticizes ex-boyfriends, an aspect of her songwriting downplayed by The Village Voice: "Being told What Songs Mean is like having a really pushy professor. And it imperils a true appreciation of Swift's talent, which is not confessional, but dramatic." However, New York believes the media scrutiny over her decision to "mine her personal life for music ... is sexist, inasmuch as it's not asked of her male peers". Swift said that not all of her songs are factual and they are sometimes based on observations. Aside from clues provided in her liner notes, Swift tries not to talk about song subjects specifically "because these are real people. You try to give insight as to where you were coming from as a writer without completely throwing somebody under the bus."

Swift during her Speak Now World Tour in Pittsburgh, 2011

For a female to write about her feelings, and then be portrayed as some clingy, insane, desperate girlfriend in need of making you marry her and have kids with her, I think that's taking something that potentially should be celebrated—a woman writing about her feelings in a confessional way—that's taking it and turning it and twisting it into something that is frankly a little sexist.

— Swift in response to criticism of her songwriting

The Guardian has praised Swift for writing about teenage years "with a kind of wistful, sepia-toned nostalgia" over the course of her first two albums. New York has remarked that many singer-songwriters have made great records as teens, but "none made great records so explicitly about their teens". The magazine has also compared her work to Brian Wilson. In Fearless, Swift featured fairy tale imagery and explored the disconnect "between fairy tales and the reality of love". Her later albums address more adult relationships. In addition to romance and love, Swift's songs have discussed parent-child relationships, friendships, alienation, fame, and career ambitions. Swift frequently includes "a tossed-off phrase to suggest large and serious things that won't fit in the song, things that enhance or subvert the surface narrative".

Rolling Stone describes Swift as "a songwriting savant with an intuitive gift for verse-chorus-bridge architecture". According to The Village Voice, she often uses third-verse point of view reversals. In terms of imagery, repetition is evident in Swift's songwriting. In The Guardian's words, "she spends so much time kissin' in the rain that it seems a miracle she hasn't developed trenchfoot". Slant Magazine adds, "to Swift's credit, she explores new lyrical motifs over the course of  album". Although reviews of Swift's work are "almost uniformly positive", The New Yorker has said she is generally portrayed "more as a skilled technician than as a Dylanesque visionary".

Music videos

Swift has collaborated with many different directors to produce her music videos, and over time she has become more involved with writing and directing. She has her own production house, Taylor Swift Productions, Inc., which is credited with producing music videos for singles such as "Me!", and is known for hiding elaborate clues and easter eggs in most of her work. In 2010, Swift co-directed the music video for "Mine" with Roman White. In 2011, she continued to collaborate with White on the music videos for "Mean" and "Ours". Swift developed the concept and treatment for "Mean". In an interview, White elaborated that Swift "was keenly involved in writing the treatment, casting and wardrobe. And she stayed for both the 15-hour shooting days, even when she wasn't in the scenes." Swift wrote the concept for the "Ours" music video and then brought in White to direct, describing her vision of both videos as being "storylines".

From 2014 to 2018, Swift collaborated with director Joseph Kahn on eight music videos—four each from her albums 1989 and Reputation. Kahn has praised Swift's involvement in the craft. In 2016, Swift worked with American Express for her "Blank Space" music video (which Kahn directed), and released the interactive app AMEX Unstaged: Taylor Swift Experience. Swift received starring and executive producer credit, and in 2015 won a Primetime Emmy Award in the Outstanding Interactive Program category for the app. She received producing credit in her music video for "Bad Blood".

In 2018, Swift developed the concept, wrote the treatment for, and starred in the music video for the Sugarland song "Babe". In 2019, she co-directed the music videos for "Me!" with Dave Meyers, "You Need to Calm Down" with Drew Kirsch and "Lover" with Kirsch. She also co-executive produced the second of them with Todrick Hall. The music video for Swift's 2020 single "The Man" marked her official solo directorial debut. Later that year, she wrote, directed, and styled the music video for "Cardigan" on her own during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Public image

Swift at the 2010 Time 100 Gala in Manhattan, where she was honored.

Swift's personal life is the subject of widespread media attention. In 2013, Abercrombie & Fitch marketed a slogan T-shirt with a "slut-shaming" remark directed toward her. The New York Times asserted in 2013 that her "dating history has begun to stir what feels like the beginning of a backlash". They questioned whether Swift was in the midst of a "quarter-life crisis". Swift has said she is unwilling to discuss her personal life in public; she believes that talking about it can be "a career weakness". In 2015, singer Ray Stevens released his album Here We Go Again which included the single "Taylor Swift is Stalking Me". In 2020, Swift revealed she struggled with an eating disorder in the past.

Rolling Stone remarks upon her polite manner: "If this is Swift's game face, it must be tattooed on because it never drops", and noted her "ease with glad-handing". The Hollywood Reporter described Swift as "the Best People Person since Bill Clinton". While presenting Swift with an award for her humanitarian endeavors in 2012, Michelle Obama described her as a singer who "has rocketed to the top of the music industry but still keeps her feet on the ground, someone who has shattered every expectation of what a 22-year-old can accomplish". Swift considers Michelle Obama to be a role model. According to The New York Times and marketing executive Matt B. Britton, Swift's business savvy has helped her "excel as an authentic personality who establishes direct connections with her audience", "touch as many people as possible", and "generate a kind of advocacy and excitement that no level of advertising could".

Swift is one of the most-followed people on social media; as of July 2020, she has over 136 million followers on Instagram, 86.5 million followers on Twitter and 38.5 million subscribers on YouTube. She is known for her friendly online interactions with her fans. She has delivered holiday gifts to fans by mail and in person, an event dubbed "Swiftmas", and considers it her "responsibility" to be conscious of her influence on young fans. She has called her fans "the longest and best relationship" she has ever had. Often labeled by media as "America's Sweetheart" due to her down-to-earth personality and girl-next-door image, Swift insists she does not "live by all these rigid, weird rules that make me feel all fenced in. I just like the way that I feel like, and that makes me feel very free". She refuses to take part in overly-sexualized photo shoots, although Bloomberg L.P. views her as a sex symbol. She has also been recognized as a style icon in fashion; Vogue named her an Icon of American Style in 2011. In 2014, she topped People's annual best-dressed list. In 2015, she was named Woman of the Year at the Elle Style Awards and ranked first on Maxim's Hot 100 list.

Impact

Among the honorific nicknames used to describe Swift are "Pop Titan" and "Country Queen". She has been credited with helping country music become more mainstream globally, with Billboard writing that "the country landscape is much different today, thanks in part to Swift and her insistence on following a game plan that many considered unorthodox" and noted the favorable views toward the genre since her debut. According to the BBC, Swift is responsible for paving the way for crossover artists "who no longer wish to be ghettoised into arbitrarily separated musical genres" and potentially "ushering in a new era of one-on-one fan interaction". Rolling Stone opined that, because Swift "worked so hard at speaking her truth" through her songwriting, she "helped opened up a space" for many female artists to "seem so effortlessly themselves" in their music in an era of tabloids. Billboard also reported that following Swift's rise to fame, labels have become more interested in signing young country singers and artists who write their own music. Guitar manufacturing company Fender deemed the "Taylor Swift factor" responsible for the worldwide phenomenon that saw young women driving 50% of new guitar sales. Swift is considered one of the artists who resurged ukuleles in modern music. She was credited as one of the key artists in boosting music industry revenue to $20 billion in 2019, a figure not seen since 2005. 

Swift performing a show at Mile High Stadium in Denver, Colorado as part of her Reputation Stadium Tour, where she became the first woman to headline a concert at that venue.

Swift is known for bringing reforms to on-demand music streaming and has been named a "leading advocate for artists' and songwriters' rights". She is credited with helping boost traditional album sales in the streaming era; Quartz acknowledged Swift as the only artist "who stills sells CDs" in 2019. In November 2014, she removed her entire catalog from the streaming service Spotify, arguing that its ad-supported free service undermined the premium service, which provides higher royalties for songwriters. In a June 2015 open letter, Swift criticized Apple Music for not offering royalties to artists during their free three-month trial period and said she would pull 1989 from the catalog. The following day, Apple announced it would pay artists during the free trial period, and Swift agreed to stream 1989 on their streaming service. Hugh McIntyre, writing for Forbes, praised Swift for using her voice to stand up against a major company and that it mattered more than any other person or organization. She re-released her entire catalog to several major streaming platforms in June 2017. In her 2018 record deal with Universal Music Group, Swift secured a guarantee from the label that any sale of its Spotify shares would result in non-recoupable payments to all artists on its roster. Swift is also one of the most vocal supporters of artists' rights to exercise greater control over their music, especially with regards to ownership of master recordings. She has condemned the "unregulated world of private equity" that is "buying up our music like it's real estate", stating vehemently that creators "deserved to own the art  make". In addition, she has been labeled as a "feminist icon" for her consistent efforts in championing gender equality and calling out misogyny and internalized sexism.

In honor of Swift's two consecutive concerts at the U.S. Bank Stadium in Minneapolis, Minnesota, Governor Mark Dayton proclaimed August 31, 2018 as "Taylor Swift Day", praising her as "a positive influence on her fans through her example of truthfulness, grace, extensive philanthropy, and strength of character". In 2019, Swift was named Woman of the Decade by Billboard for being "one of the most accomplished musical artists of all time over the course of the 2010s." She was honored as Artist of the Decade at the 2019 American Music Awards, as well as by several publications. Vulture stated that Swift "bent the music industry to her will" with commercial success, songwriting, steps she took for feminism and female empowerment, and activism within the music industry by standing up for artist rights, by being the "savviest power player" of the 2010s. She was listed as one of the most influential artists of the decade by CNN for "pushing the boundaries of country and pop, and fighting for the rights to her music". Vogue regarded her as one of the world's biggest sustainable fashion influencers. According to CNET, Swift has wide social media influence; she has been credited with the resurgence of Polaroids and Instax cameras after featuring an instant photograph in the cover artwork for 1989 and her 2018 partnership with Fujifilm, respectively. Swift also led a massive spike in voter registrations on Vote.org following her 2018 political endorsements.

Musician and producer Jack Antonoff credited Swift for kick-starting his career as a producer. Swift's work has inspired numerous artists, including Kelsea Ballerini, Ruth B., Camila Cabello, The Chainsmokers, Selena Gomez, Ellie Goulding, Conan Gray, Halsey, Niall Horan, Maren Morris, Nina Nesbitt, Finneas O'Connell, Olivia Rodrigo, Tegan and Sara, Troye Sivan, and The Vamps.

Awards and achievements

Main article: List of awards and nominations received by Taylor Swift

Swift has received many awards and honors, including 10 Grammy Awards, 29 American Music Awards (most wins by an artist), 23 Billboard Music Awards (most wins by a female artist), seven Guinness World Records, 12 Country Music Association Awards (including the prestigious Pinnacle Award), eight Academy of Country Music Awards, one Brit Award, and one Emmy Award. As a songwriter, she has been honored by the Nashville Songwriters Association and the Songwriters Hall of Fame, and was the youngest person included on Rolling Stone's list of the 100 Greatest Songwriters of All Time in 2015. In 2019, Billboard placed Swift eighth on its Greatest of All Time Artists Chart; she was the highest-ranking artist on the list who debuted in the 21st century, and the only artist in the top-ten from that century.

Swift is one of the best-selling music artists of all time. She has sold over 50 million pure albums to-date, including 37.3 million in the U.S., and 150 million singles worldwide. Worldwide, she is one of the top five artists in terms of digital sales, and has accumulated over 97 million units in album consumption and 54 billion streams across all platforms. Swift's first five studio albums have each sold over four million copies in the U.S. alone. She is the first artist to have four studio albums sell one million copies in their first week in the U.S. and the third best-selling digital singles artist in the U.S. thus far, with a total of 120 million equivalent units certified by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). She was the highest-paid female musician of the 2010s, placing second on Forbes's list of Top-Earning Musicians of the Decade with earnings of $825 million. In 2020, she became the first female artist in the U.S. to have both an album (Fearless) and a song ("Shake It Off") be certified diamond by the RIAA. Swift is also a highly successful touring artist, having broken numerous venue attendance and grossing records throughout her career. Her Reputation Stadium Tour became the highest-grossing U.S. tour in history, and she was the top female touring artist of the 2010s.

Swift has also appeared in various power listings. Time included her on its annual list of the 100 most influential people in 2010, 2015, and 2019. From 2011 to 2020, she appeared in the top three on the Forbes Top-Earning Women in Music list with earnings of $45 million, $57 million, $55 million, $64 million, $80 million, $170 million, $44 million and $80 million, topping the list in 2016 and 2019. She also topped the magazine's list of the 100 highest-paid celebrities in 2016 with $170 million—a feat that was entered into the Guinness World Records—and again in 2019 with $185 million; she ranked among the top ten in 2011, 2013 and 2015. In 2015, Swift became the youngest woman to be included on Forbes' list of the 100 most powerful women, ranked at number 64. She was one of the finalists for Time Person of the Year in 2014 and was awarded the honor in 2017 as one of the "Silence Breakers" who spoke up about sexual assault. In June 2019, Forbes estimated Swift's net worth at $360 million. Swift was the most googled female music artist of 2019.

Other ventures

Philanthropy

Swift's extensive philanthropic efforts have been recognized by the Do Something Awards and the Tennessee Disaster Services. She has also received The Big Help Award for her "dedication to helping others" and "inspiring others through action", and the Ripple of Hope Award for her "dedication to advocacy at such a young age". In 2008, she donated $100,000 to the Red Cross to help the victims of the flood in Iowa that year. Swift has performed at charity relief events including Sydney's Sound Relief concert. She also recorded a song for the Hope for Haiti Now album. In response to the May 2010 Tennessee floods, Swift donated $500,000 during a telethon hosted by WSMV. In 2011, Swift used a dress rehearsal of her Speak Now tour as a benefit concert for victims of recent tornadoes in the U.S., raising more than $750,000. In 2016, she made a $1 million donation to Louisiana flood relief efforts and donated to the Dolly Parton Fire Fund. In 2017, Swift made a donation to the Houston Food Bank after Hurricane Harvey struck the city. In 2020, she donated $1 million to relief efforts for a series of tornadoes that impacted Tennessee.

Swift is a supporter of the arts. She is a benefactor of the Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame and in 2010 she donated $75,000 to Nashville's Hendersonville High School to help refurbish the school auditorium. In 2012, she pledged $4 million to fund the building of a new education center at the Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum in Nashville. That year, she also partnered with textbook rental company Chegg to donate $60,000 to the music departments of six US colleges. In 2013, Swift donated $100,000 to the Nashville Symphony. Swift also promotes children's literacy; in 2009, she donated $250,000 to various schools around the country to improve education. Her other endeavors to promote literacy included donating thousands of books to the Reading Public Library in Pennsylvania, the Nashville Public Library in Tennessee, and New York City schools. In 2015, she donated all proceeds from the sale of the promotional single "Welcome to New York", at the time $50,000, to the New York City Department of Education and the proceeds from the "Wildest Dreams" music video to the African Parks Foundation. Swift also sampled a song by the Toronto-based Regent Park School of Music for her song "It's Nice To Have A Friend", the seventeenth track on her 2019 album Lover, thus enabling the school to earn royalties from her album; she also made a personal donation.

In 2007, Swift launched a campaign to protect children from online predators, in partnership with the Tennessee Association of Chiefs of Police. In 2009, Swift recorded a Sound Matters public service announcement (PSA) to make listeners aware of the importance of listening "responsibly" to prevent hearing impairment. She has donated items to several charities for auction, including the Elton John AIDS Foundation, the UNICEF Tap Project, MusiCares, and Feeding America. As a recipient of the Academy of Country Music's Entertainer of the Year in 2011, Swift donated $25,000 to St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Tennessee. In 2012, Swift participated in the Stand Up to Cancer telethon, performing "Ronan", a song she wrote in memory of a four-year-old boy who died of neuroblastoma. The song was made available for digital download with all proceeds donated to cancer-related charities. She has also worked with the Make-A-Wish Foundation and Habitat for Humanity. In 2014, she donated $100,000 to the V Foundation for Cancer Research, and $50,000 to the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. Throughout her career, she has made numerous private visits to hospitals to meet with and support sick patients. Swift has encouraged young people to volunteer in their local communities as part of Global Youth Service Day. In 2015, she helped a pregnant and homeless fan purchase a new house.

Swift has made several donations to help victims of sexual assault, such as to American singer-songwriter Kesha to help with her legal battles against Dr. Luke, and to actress Mariska Hargitay's Joyful Heart Foundation organization. In April 2019, she donated $113,000 to the LGBT organization Tennessee Equality Project. Swift donated an undisclosed sum to the media advocacy organization GLAAD in support of Pride Month in June 2019. During the COVID-19 pandemic, Swift donated $3,000 each to a number of fans as financial support and an undisclosed sum to Nashville music store Grimey's to cover worker pay and three months' worth of health care. She also donated undisclosed sums to the World Health Organization and Feeding America and offered one of her signed guitars as part of an auction to raise money for the National Health Service in 2020. Swift performed her 2019 song "Soon You'll Get Better" during the Lady Gaga-curated One World: Together At Home television special, a benefit concert by Global Citizen to raise funds for the World Health Organization's COVID-19 Solidarity Response Fund, in April 2020. In June 2020, she donated an undisclosed amount to the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund in light of the death of George Floyd and the Black Lives Matter movement and urged fans to do the same.

Politics and activism

Swift is a feminist and pro-choice. She has consistently spoken out against sexism and misogyny throughout her career, such as the Billboard Women in Music summit in 2019 and in her 2020 single "The Man"; she was one of the founding signatories of the Time's Up movement against sexual harassment. During the 2008 presidential campaign, she promoted the Every Woman Counts campaign, aimed at engaging women in the political process. She was one of many country stars to record a PSA for the Vote (For Your) Country campaign. She is also an outspoken critic of LGBT discrimination and white supremacy, calling the latter "repulsive" and stating that "There should be no place for it." Following the 2008 murder of openly gay teenager Larry King, she recorded a GLSEN PSA aimed at combating hate crimes. On the first anniversary of King's death, she told Seventeen that her parents taught her "never to judge others based on whom they love, what color their skin is, or their religion". The music video for Swift's anti-bullying song "Mean" deals in part with homophobia in high schools; it was nominated for an MTV VMA social activism award in 2011. The New York Times believes she is part of "a new wave of young (and mostly straight) women who are providing the soundtrack for a generation of gay fans coming to terms with their identity in a time of turbulent and confusing cultural messages". After the Orlando nightclub shooting in June 2016, Swift penned a letter to honor the victims.

Swift has supported the March for Our Lives movement and gun control reform in the U.S. Prior to the 2018 midterm elections, she endorsed candidates for public office for the first time in a decision covered heavily in her Miss Americana (2020) documentary, declaring her support for two Democratic candidates in an Instagram post: Congressman Jim Cooper for re-election to the House of Representatives, and former Tennessee governor Phil Bredesen for election to the Senate. She spoke out against Bredesen's opponent, Republican Congresswoman Marsha Blackburn, saying she was "appalled" and "terrified" by her voting record. Swift expressed her desire for greater LGBT rights and gender and racial equality, condemned systemic racism, and encouraged her fans to vote according to their personal values. Vote.org reported that 65,000 people registered to vote in the 24 hours following Swift's post, an unprecedented surge even accounting for usual registration increases as deadlines approach. During Swift's acceptance speech for Artist of the Year at the American Music Awards of 2018, she encouraged her fans to vote in the 2018 midterm elections. In June 2019, Swift published a letter addressed to Republican Senator Lamar Alexander, urging him to support the Equality Act, and created a petition on Change.org urging the Senate to do the same. It has attracted more than 500,000 signatures, including from Democratic politicians Cory Booker, Elizabeth Warren, Beto O'Rourke, and Kirsten Gillibrand. While accepting an award at the 2019 MTV Video Music Awards on August 26, Swift called on the Trump administration to pass the Equality Act. In an August 2019 interview with The Guardian, she criticized President Donald Trump for "gaslighting the American public" and accused his administration of acting like an "autocracy", vowing to do "everything  can" to prevent his re-election in 2020. In June 2020, she praised a Supreme Court ruling that protects LGBT workers from discrimination. That month, during an appearance on Pride Live's Stonewall Day livestream event, she again urged the passage of the Equality Act and criticized the 2020 U.S. Census for not providing options for transgender and non-binary people.

Swift has showed support for the Black Lives Matter movement and condemned racism and police brutality in the U.S. while acknowledging her own privilege. In May 2020, she called for justice in the deaths of African-American men Ahmaud Arbery and George Floyd. Responding directly to President Trump's tweet on the Twin Cities riots and Floyd's death, Swift criticized Trump for "stoking the fires of white supremacy and racism" and " the nerve to feign moral superiority before threatening violence". She shared an essay written by President Barack Obama on policy change in the wake of the George Floyd protests and, citing the COVID-19 pandemic, advocated for mail-in voting for the 2020 U.S. elections. Swift called for the removal of Confederate statues in Tennessee—particularly those of Nathan Bedford Forrest and Edward Carmack—expressing her disgust at "monuments standing in our state that celebrate racist historical figures". She advocated for Juneteenth to become a national holiday.

Product endorsements

While promoting her debut album, Swift appeared as the face of Verizon Wireless' Mobile Music campaign. In the Fearless era, she launched a l.e.i. sundress range at Wal-Mart, and designed American Greetings cards and Jakks Pacific dolls. She became a spokesperson for the National Hockey League's (NHL) Nashville Predators and Sony Cyber-shot digital cameras. She released a special edition of her album Speak Now through Target. Swift became a CoverGirl spokesmodel and launched two Elizabeth Arden fragrances—Wonderstruck and Wonderstruck Enchanted.

While promoting her fourth album, Red, Swift offered exclusive album promotions through Target, Papa John's Pizza, and Walgreens. She became a spokesmodel for Diet Coke, and Keds sneakers, released her third Elizabeth Arden fragrance, named Taylor by Taylor Swift, and continued her partnerships with Sony Electronics and American Greetings. Swift released her fourth fragrance, Taylor by Taylor Swift: Made of Starlight, and partnered with the companies AirAsia and Qantas during the Red Tour. The companies acted as the official airlines for the Australian and Asian legs; Cornetto sponsored the Asian leg of the tour. While promoting 1989, Swift had tie-ins with Subway, Keds, Target, Xfinity, and Diet Coke. In 2014, Swift released her fifth fragrance, Incredible Things, in 2014. In 2016, she worked with Apple Music to release a series of three commercials.

Swift signed a multi-year deal with AT&T in 2016. She later headlined DirecTV's Super Saturday Night event on the eve of the 2017 Super Bowl. While promoting Reputation, Swift released a series of behind-the-scenes videos showing the album recording process through DirecTV. In 2018, Swift released two commercials for AT&T. The same year, Swift partnered with UPS as an official delivery partner for Reputation and Fujifilm on a special-edition autographed Instax camera, which includes a selfie-mode and double exposure. The cameras showed massive growth in sales after partnership with Swift. In 2019, Swift signed a multi-year partnership with Capital One.

Discography

Main articles: Taylor Swift discography and songs

Taylor Swift (2006)

Fearless (2008)

Speak Now (2010)

Red (2012)

1989 (2014)

Reputation (2017)

Lover (2019)

Folklore (2020)

Filmography

Main article: Taylor Swift videography

Valentine's Day (2010)

The Lorax (2012)

The Giver (2014)

Cats (2019)

Miss Americana (2020)

Tours

Main article: List of Taylor Swift live performances

Fearless Tour (2009–2010)

Speak Now World Tour (2011–2012)

The Red Tour (2013–2014)

The 1989 World Tour (2015)

Reputation Stadium Tour (2018)

Lover Fest (2021)

See also

Biography portal

Pop music portal

Pennsylvania portal

United States portal

List of best-selling singles in the United States

List of most-subscribed YouTube channels

List of most-followed Instagram accounts

List of most-followed Twitter accounts

List of highest-certified music artists in the United States

List of best-selling music artists

List of Billboard Hot 100 chart achievements and milestones

List of best-selling albums by year in the United States

Footnotes

^ Swift and Pat Monahan of Train wrote the song originally for Swift's 2012 album Red.

^ In August 2015, her 1989 World Tour grossed $181.5 million.

References

^ "Taylor Swift Co-Wrote Calvin Harris' 'This Is What You Came For' Under Swedish Pseudonym". Billboard. July 13, 2016. Retrieved May 25, 2020.

^ Monroe, Jazz (May 25, 2020). "Taylor Swift and Jack Antonoff Team for Mysterious "Look What You Made Me Do" Cover on Killing Eve". Pitchfork. Retrieved May 26, 2020.

^ "America's Self Made Women — Taylor Swift". Forbes. June 4, 2019. Retrieved June 29, 2020.

^ "Taylor Swift: The record-breaking artist in numbers". CBBC Newsround. Retrieved April 20, 2020.

^ Sutherland, Mark (May 23, 2015). "Taylor Swift interview: 'A relationship? No one's going to sign up for this'". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Retrieved April 20, 2020.

^ a b Jepson, Louisa (2013). Taylor Swift. Simon & Schuster. p. 1. ISBN 978-1-4711-3087-8. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017. Retrieved August 16, 2016.

^ "Taylor Swift tells Scotland: 'I am one of you'". The Independent. June 24, 2015. Retrieved July 10, 2019.

^ Scott, Walter (June 11, 2015). "What Famous Pop Star Is Named After James Taylor?". Parade. Archived from the original on October 15, 2016. Retrieved December 12, 2018.

^ Roth, Madeline (May 19, 2015). "Taylor Swift's Brother Had The Most Epic Graduation Weekend Ever". MTV News. Archived from the original on July 23, 2016. Retrieved July 25, 2016.

^ a b c d e f g Widdicombe, Lizzie (October 10, 2011). "You Belong With Me". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on July 24, 2014. Retrieved October 11, 2011.

^ Raab, Scott (October 20, 2014). "Taylor Swift Interview". Esquire. Archived from the original on February 16, 2015. Retrieved April 11, 2015.

^ "Taylor Swift on Politicians Co-opting Faith: 'I'm a Christian. That's Not What We Stand For'". Relevant. January 31, 2020. Retrieved April 2, 2020.

^ Uhrich, Bill (February 13, 2010). "Photos Students at Alvernia Montessori School sending Taylor Swift a valentine". Reading Eagle. Archived from the original on October 16, 2013. Retrieved February 25, 2013.

^ Hatza, George (December 8, 2008). "Taylor Swift: Growing into superstardom". Reading Eagle. Archived from the original on April 1, 2012. Retrieved April 17, 2012.

^ Mennen, Lauren (November 12, 2014). "Taylor Swift's Wyomissing childhood home on the market for $799,500". Philadelphia Daily News. Archived from the original on October 17, 2016. Retrieved October 13, 2016.

^ Chang, David (February 22, 2016). "Taylor Swift Returns to Reading Pennsylvania as Maid of Honor in Friend's Wedding". WCAU. Archived from the original on September 16, 2016. Retrieved August 26, 2016.

^ "Taylor Swift, Age 12". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on August 27, 2016. Retrieved August 26, 2016.

^ Cooper, Brittany Joy (April 15, 2012). "Taylor Swift Opens Up About a Future in Acting and Admiration for Emma Stone". Taste of Country. Archived from the original on April 17, 2012. Retrieved April 17, 2012.

^ a b MacPherson, Alex (October 18, 2012). "Taylor Swift: 'I want to believe in pretty lies'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on August 26, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016.

^ a b Rolling Stone Interview: The Unabridged Taylor Swift, December 2, 2008

^ a b c Morris, Edward (December 1, 2006). "When She Thinks 'Tim McGraw', Taylor Swift Savors Payoff: Hardworking Teen to Open for George Strait Next Year". CMT. Archived from the original on June 26, 2015. Retrieved March 11, 2010.

^ Diu, Nisha Lilia (April 3, 2011). "Taylor Swift: 'I won't do sexy shoots'". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on May 6, 2013. Retrieved April 17, 2012.

^ "News : CMT Insider Interview: Taylor Swift (Part 1 of 2)". CMT. November 26, 2008. Archived from the original on January 23, 2015. Retrieved July 1, 2012.

^ Malec, Jim (May 2, 2011). "Taylor Swift: The Garden In The Machine". American Songwriter. Archived from the original on May 10, 2012. Retrieved May 21, 2012.

^ Martino, Andy (January 10, 2015). "EXCLUSIVE: The real story of Taylor Swift's guitar 'legend'". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on November 22, 2015. Retrieved August 28, 2017.

^ "americanbar.org PDF" (PDF). Americanbar.org. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 11, 2012. Retrieved April 18, 2012.

^ "On tour with Taylor Swift – Dateline NBC". NBC News. May 31, 2009. Archived from the original on October 5, 2013. Retrieved July 1, 2012.

^ Castro, Vicky (February 6, 2015). "How to Succeed as an Entrepreneur, Taylor Swift Style". Inc. Monsueto Ventures. Archived from the original on September 24, 2016. Retrieved February 9, 2015.

^ Jo, Nancy (January 2, 2014). "Taylor Swift and the Growing of a Superstar: Her Men, Her Moods, Her Music". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on November 10, 2015. Retrieved November 11, 2015.

^ "News : Taylor Swift's High School Names Auditorium in Her Honor". CMT. September 23, 2010. Archived from the original on November 21, 2014. Retrieved April 18, 2012.

^ a b Grigoriadis, Vanessa (March 5, 2009). "The Very Pink, Very Perfect Life of Taylor Swift". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 3, 2019. Retrieved July 28, 2019.

^ "Taylor Swift: The Garden In The Machine". American Songwriter. May 2, 2011. Archived from the original on August 7, 2013. Retrieved May 21, 2012.

^ "Songwriter Taylor Swift Signs Publishing Deal With Sony/ATV". Broadcast Music, Inc. May 12, 2005. Archived from the original on December 4, 2012. Retrieved April 20, 2012.

^ Kosser, Michael (June 3, 2010). "Liz Rose: Co-Writer to the Stars". American Songwriter. Archived from the original on December 24, 2011. Retrieved April 19, 2012.

^ Leahey, Andrew (October 24, 2014). "Songwriter Spotlight: Liz Rose". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 26, 2016. Retrieved September 24, 2016.

^ DeLuca, Dan (November 11, 2008). "Focused on 'great songs' Taylor Swift isn't thinking about "the next level" or Joe Jon as gossip". Philadelphia Daily News. p. 1. Archived from the original on November 18, 2012. Retrieved April 17, 2012.

^ Preston, John (April 26, 2009). "Taylor Swift: the 19-year-old country music star conquering America – and now Britain". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 5, 2012. Retrieved August 30, 2012.

^ Rapkin, Mickey (July 27, 2017). "Oral History of Nashville's Bluebird Cafe: Taylor Swift, Maren Morris, Dierks Bentley & More on the Legendary Venue". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017. Retrieved July 28, 2017.

^ a b Hiatt, Brian (October 25, 2012). "Taylor Swift in Wonderland". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 31, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016.

^ Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (June 26, 2013). "Toby Keith, Cowboy Capitalist: Country's $500 Million Man". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 27, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016.

^ Taylor Swift (CD). Big Machine Records. 2006. BMR120702.

^ a b c d e Solin, Jennifer (August 10, 2016). "Taylor Swift New Album Release Date Postponed; Is She Laying Low After Kim Kardashian, Kanye West Drama?". International Business Times. Archived from the original on August 16, 2016. Retrieved August 15, 2016.

^ Caramanica, Jon (September 5, 2008). "A Young Outsider's Life Turned Inside Out". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved August 1, 2016.

^ Trust, Gary (October 29, 2009). "Chart Beat Thursday: Taylor Swift, Tim McGraw Linked Again". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 7, 2013. Retrieved November 8, 2016.

^ "Taylor Swift Total Album Sales". Statistic Brain Research Institute. Archived from the original on August 30, 2016. Retrieved August 30, 2016.

^ Willman, Chris (February 5, 2008). "Taylor Swift's Road to Fame". Entertainment Weekly. p. 3. Archived from the original on February 21, 2015. Retrieved April 22, 2012.

^ Cowling, Lauren (November 12, 2014). "5 of Taylor Swift's Most Country Performances". Country Outfitter Life. Archived from the original on August 9, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016.

^ "Taylor Swift Joins Rascal Flatts Tour". CMT. October 18, 2006. Archived from the original on January 7, 2015. Retrieved March 11, 2010.

^ Whitaker, Sterling; Hammar, Ania (May 27, 2019). "How Eric Church's Rascal Flatts Feud Helped Launch Taylor Swift's Career". Taste of Country. Archived from the original on June 6, 2019. Retrieved June 10, 2019.

^ "Taylor Swift No. 1 on iTunes". Great American Country. December 19, 2007. Archived from the original on March 16, 2015. Retrieved July 5, 2010.

^ "Teardrops on My Guitar". Billboard. Retrieved December 15, 2010.

^ "Taylor Swift owns top of country chart". Country Standard Time. July 23, 2008. Archived from the original on July 31, 2008. Retrieved December 26, 2008.

^ "Wal-Mart "Eyes" New Taylor Swift Project". Great American Country. Archived from the original on March 16, 2015. Retrieved July 24, 2008.

^ Rosa, Christopher (March 24, 2015). "Opening Acts Who Became Bigger Than The Headliner". VH1. Archived from the original on November 10, 2015. Retrieved November 11, 2015.

^ a b "Taylor Swift Youngest Winner of Songwriter/Artist Award". Great American Country. October 16, 2007. Archived from the original on March 17, 2015. Retrieved February 2, 2015.

^ "Photos : All Taylor Swift Pictures : Horizon Award Winner Poses in the Pressroom". CMT. September 7, 2007. Archived from the original on November 13, 2012. Retrieved May 21, 2012.

^ "Photos : 43rd Annual ACM Awards – Onstage: Winners : Acceptance Speech". CMT. May 18, 2008. Archived from the original on November 13, 2012. Retrieved May 21, 2012.

^ "Taylor Swift, Rascal Flatts, Carrie Underwood Score at 2008 AMA Awards" (Blog). Roughstock.com. November 24, 2008. Archived from the original on July 10, 2014. Retrieved May 21, 2012.

^ "Amy Winehouse Wins Best New Artist, Kanye West Pays Tribute to Mom – Grammy Awards 2008, Grammy Awards". People. October 2, 2008. Archived from the original on November 13, 2012. Retrieved May 21, 2012.

^ "Rascal Flatts Announce Summer Tour With Taylor Swift". CMT. May 5, 2008. Retrieved June 5, 2019.

^ Caplan, David (September 8, 2008). "Scoop". People. Archived from the original on February 2, 2016. Retrieved March 6, 2012.

^ Rizzo, Monica (November 24, 2008). "Scoop – Couples, Camilla Belle, Joe Jonas". People. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved March 6, 2012.

^ "Love Story – Taylor Swift". Billboard. Retrieved March 5, 2011.

^ a b "Discography Taylor Swift". ARIA Charts. Archived from the original on March 23, 2012. Retrieved January 2, 2010.

^ Ben-Yehuda, Ayala (August 13, 2009). "Black Eyed Peas, Jason Mraz Tie Records on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved March 13, 2010.

^ Grein, Paul (March 16, 2012). "Chart Watch Extra: Top Albums Of Last 10 Years" (Blog). Yahoo! Music. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved June 10, 2011.

^ Herrera, Monica (October 8, 2009). "Taylor Swift's "Fearless" Tour Returns March 2010". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 18, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016.

^ Mapes, Jillian (November 23, 2010). "Taylor Swift Announces 'Speak Now' World Tour". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved May 15, 2012.

^ Weiss, Dan (December 12, 2011). "Taylor Swift: Journey To Fearless DVD". American Songwriter. Archived from the original on August 15, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016.

^ Ryan, Sarah (August 10, 2009). "Taylor Swift Pranks Keith Urban" (Blog). Great American Country. Archived from the original on September 6, 2015. Retrieved November 11, 2015.

^ Akers, Shelley (June 9, 2008). "Taylor Swift to Appear in Hannah Montana Movie". People. Archived from the original on October 27, 2017. Retrieved October 27, 2017.

^ a b "Hannah Montana: The Movie (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack) by Hannah Montana". iTunes Store. Archived from the original on May 2, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016.

^ "Kanye calls Taylor Swift after 'View' appearance". MSNBC. September 15, 2009. Archived from the original on October 6, 2013. Retrieved September 16, 2009.

^ "Taylor Swift Thanks "Gracious" Beyonce for Inviting Her Onstage After Kanye Stunt at VMAs". Rolling Stone. September 14, 2009. Archived from the original on June 15, 2012. Retrieved May 15, 2012.

^ Anderson, Kyle (September 16, 2009). "Kanye West's VMA Interruption Gives Birth To Internet Photo Meme". MTV. Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved October 3, 2009.

^ a b Montgomery, James (February 2, 2010). "Why You Shouldn't Hate on Taylor Swift". MTV. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved May 15, 2012.

^ Ditzian, Eric (2009). "Taylor Swift, Michael Jackson Big Winners at American Music Awards". MTV. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved May 15, 2012.

^ "2009 Artists of the Year". Billboard. December 10, 2009. Archived from the original on January 4, 2010. Retrieved May 21, 2012.

^ "The 150 Greatest Albums Made By Women". NPR. July 24, 2017. Retrieved September 2, 2017.

^ Kreps, Daniel (February 1, 2010). "Beyonce, Taylor Swift Dominate 2010 Grammy Awards". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 15, 2012. Retrieved February 13, 2012.

^ Kreps, Daniel (February 4, 2010). "Taylor Swift's Label Lashes Out at Critics of Grammy Performance". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 19, 2013. Retrieved May 15, 2012.

^ Caramanica, Jon (February 1, 2010). "For Young Superstar Taylor Swift, Big Wins Mean Innocence Lost". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 28, 2012. Retrieved May 15, 2012.

^ Kaufman, Gil (November 12, 2009). "Taylor Swift Dominates CMA Awards". MTV News. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved September 13, 2016.

^ "Taylor Swift Wins Album of the Year at Academy of Country Music Awards". Big Machine Records. PR Newswire. April 6, 2009. Archived from the original on April 16, 2009. Retrieved April 7, 2009.

^ Vena, Jocelyn (November 6, 2009). "John Mayer Talks Taylor Swift Collaboration 'Half of My Heart'". MTV. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved May 15, 2012.

^ "Kellie Pickler Has Her 'Best Days' Thanks To Taylor Swift". MTV. Archived from the original on January 1, 2016. Retrieved November 11, 2015.

^ "Boys Like Girls Dish on Taylor Swift". Seventeen. December 15, 2009. Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved May 15, 2012.

^ Vena, Jocelyn (December 28, 2009). "New Taylor Swift Song Included In 'Valentine's Day' Featurette". MTV. Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved November 11, 2015.

^ a b c "Taylor Swift – Chart history on Canadian Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 9, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016.

^ Park, Michael Y.; Sia, Nicole (December 29, 2009). "Taylor & Taylor Romance Was Overblown, Says Source". People. Archived from the original on November 13, 2012. Retrieved March 6, 2012.

^ "Billboard Bits: Taylor Swifts Offers 'Apology' To Taylor Lautner, Christina Aguilera Confirms Split". Billboard. October 10, 2012. Archived from the original on June 5, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016.

^ Sharkey, Betsy (February 12, 2010). "Review: 'Valentine's Day' – Page 2". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 11, 2012. Retrieved July 30, 2012.

^ McCarthy, Todd (February 7, 2010). "Valentine's Day – Film Reviews". Variety. Archived from the original on July 29, 2013. Retrieved July 30, 2012.

^ Caramanica, Jon (March 6, 2009). "OMG! Taylor Swift Does 'CSI'!". The New York Times (Blog). Archived from the original on August 14, 2011. Retrieved May 7, 2012.

^ Strecker, Erin (January 2, 2015). "Remember When Taylor Swift Shined as 'Saturday Night Live' Host?". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 24, 2015. Retrieved January 15, 2015.

^ Dukes, Billy (October 22, 2012). "10 Things You Didn't Know About Taylor Swift". Taste of Country. Retrieved July 26, 2020.

^ Tucker, Ken (November 8, 2009). "Taylor Swift hosted the best 'Saturday Night Live' of the season so far... really!?!". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved August 28, 2017.

^ Pietroluongo, Silvio (August 11, 2010). "Taylor Swift Makes Sparkling Hot 100 Entrance". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2016. Retrieved July 25, 2016.

^ Caramanica, Jon (October 20, 2010). "Taylor Swift, Angry on 'Speak Now'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 21, 2010. Retrieved October 23, 2010.

^ Kaufman, Gil (November 3, 2010). "Taylor Swift's Speak Now Tops 1 Million in First Week". MTV News. Archived from the original on August 10, 2016. Retrieved August 8, 2016.

^ "Fastest-selling digital album in the U.S. by a female artist". Guinness World Records. Archived from the original on June 22, 2015. Retrieved June 16, 2015.

^ "Most simultaneous US hot 100 hits by a female". Guinness World Records. Archived from the original on June 22, 2015. Retrieved June 16, 2015.

^ Hammel, Sara (January 4, 2011). "Taylor Swift & Jake Gyllenhaal Break Up: Source". People. Archived from the original on May 9, 2012. Retrieved March 6, 2012.

^ Wyland, Sarah (February 12, 2012). "Taylor Swift Takes Home Two GRAMMYs at Tribute-Filled Show" (Blog). Great American Country. Archived from the original on September 6, 2015. Retrieved February 13, 2012.

^ Suddath, Claire (February 12, 2012). "Taylor Swift, "Mean" | The Best and Worst of the 2012 Grammys". Time. Archived from the original on April 24, 2012. Retrieved April 22, 2012.

^ Deerwester, Jayme (February 12, 2012). "Adoration for Adele: 6 Grammys". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 26, 2012. Retrieved April 22, 2012.

^ Shelburne, Craig (October 18, 2010). "Taylor Swift Named NSAI's Songwriter-Artist of the Year". CMT. Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved November 21, 2015.

^ Smith, Hazel (October 24, 2011). "News : Hot Dish: Taylor Swift Sings Alan Jackson's Masterpiece at Nashville Songwriters Celebration". CMT. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved April 22, 2012.

^ Roland, Tom (December 2, 2011). "Taylor Swift: Billboard's Woman of the Year". Billboard. p. 1. Archived from the original on February 3, 2013. Retrieved May 15, 2012.

^ Talbott, Chris; Silva, Cristina (April 2, 2012). "Taylor Swift wins ACM entertainer of the year". Yahoo!. Associated Press. Archived from the original on August 23, 2016. Retrieved May 15, 2012.

^ "CMA Awards 2011: Taylor Swift wins entertainer of the year". CBS News. November 9, 2011. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved May 15, 2012.

^ Kellogg, Jane (November 20, 2011). "AMAs 2011: Winners and Nominees Complete List". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 27, 2015. Retrieved November 21, 2015.

^ Sheffield, Rob (June 23, 2012). "Women Who Rock: The 50 Greatest Albums of All Time". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 10, 2016. Retrieved July 15, 2017.

^ Allen, Bob (March 29, 2012). "Hot Tours: Taylor Swift, George Strait, Cirque Du Soleil". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 21, 2013. Retrieved May 10, 2012.

^ "Taylor Swift News and Blog". taylorswift.com. September 21, 2011. Archived from the original on October 11, 2011. Retrieved September 21, 2011.

^ Herrera, Monica (March 15, 2012). "Taylor Swift, Arcade Fire Talk 'Hunger Games'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 27, 2015. Retrieved May 10, 2012.

^ "Nominations 2013 — Golden Globe Awards". goldenglobes.org. December 13, 2012. Archived from the original on December 14, 2012. Retrieved December 13, 2012.

^ Horowitz, Steven J. (April 20, 2012). "B.o.B Explains Origins of Taylor Swift Collaboration "Both of Us. HipHopDX. Archived from the original on September 10, 2015. Retrieved May 15, 2012.

^ Toomedy, Alyssa. "Taylor Swift and Conor Kennedy Breakup: Anatomy of a Split". E!. Archived from the original on December 4, 2015. Retrieved November 10, 2015.

^ Trust, Gary (August 22, 2012). "Taylor Swift Scores First Hot 100 No. 1". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 13, 2013. Retrieved August 22, 2012.

^ "Discography Taylor Swift". New Zealand Charts. Retrieved July 26, 2016.

^ Lynch, Kevin (September 4, 2013). "Calvin Harris trumps Michael Jackson feat to join Taylor Swift, Rihanna and One Direction in Guinness World Records™ 2014 book". Guinness World Records. Archived from the original on June 22, 2015. Retrieved June 16, 2015.

^ a b "Taylor Swift – Chart history". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 9, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2016.

^ Apodaca, Joseph. "Billboard names Taylor Swift 2014's No. 1 music Money Maker – see who made the top 10". KABC-TV. Archived from the original on May 16, 2016. Retrieved June 19, 2016.

^ "Taylor Swift's 'Red' Sells 1.21 Million; Biggest Sales Week for an Album Since 2002". Billboard. September 14, 2009. Archived from the original on February 1, 2013. Retrieved November 7, 2012.

^ Greenwald, David (September 6, 2013). "Taylor Swift, Rihanna, Justin Bieber Among 2014 Guinness Record-Setters". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 8, 2015. Retrieved July 27, 2016.

^ Allen, Bob (July 3, 2014). "Taylor Swift's Red Wraps as All-Time Country Tour". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 1, 2015. Retrieved April 11, 2015.

^ Welch, Andy (April 6, 2014). "Taylor Swift breaks China ticket sales record on 'Red' tour". NME. Archived from the original on February 17, 2019. Retrieved February 17, 2019.

^ "Grammys 2014: The complete list of nominees and winners". Los Angeles Times. January 26, 2014. Archived from the original on March 4, 2015. Retrieved January 25, 2015.

^ "VMAs: The 2013 Winner's List". Entertainment Weekly. August 25, 2013. Archived from the original on March 9, 2016. Retrieved August 25, 2013.

^ Gregoire, Carolyn (November 19, 2012). "Taylor Swift AMA Awards 2012: Pop Star Performs 'I Knew You Were Trouble' (Video)". HuffPost. Archived from the original on May 26, 2013. Retrieved June 10, 2013.

^ Payne, Chris (November 25, 2013). "Taylor Swift & Justin Timberlake Win Big at American Music Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 24, 2015. Retrieved November 21, 2015.

^ "NSAI Songwriter/Artists of the Year". Nashville Songwriters Association International. Archived from the original on August 19, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016.

^ Caramanica, Jon (November 7, 2013). "Country Awards Hold Swift Close". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 11, 2013. Retrieved April 3, 2014.

^ "Taylor Swift's Boyfriend Timeline: 10 Relationships & Their Songs". Billboard. December 30, 2014. Archived from the original on August 26, 2016. Retrieved August 26, 2016.

^ Labrecque, Jeff (December 12, 2013). "'12 Years a Slave' and 'American Hustle' lead Golden Globe nominees". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 23, 2015. Retrieved December 12, 2013.

^ Bonaguro, Alison (January 25, 2013). "News : Offstage: Tim McGraw Wanted to Make Taylor Swift Duet an Event". CMT. Archived from the original on July 12, 2015. Retrieved February 25, 2013.

^ Blistein, Doyle (June 4, 2013). "Taylor Swift Joins Rolling Stones for 'As Tears Go By'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 9, 2013. Retrieved June 10, 2013.

^ a b The Rolling Stones (June 4, 2013). The Rolling Stones & Taylor Swift – As Tears Go By – Live in Chicago. Archived from the original on February 13, 2016. Retrieved August 23, 2017 – via YouTube.

^ "Taylor Swift Joins Florida Georgia Line Onstage for 'Cruise'". Taste of Country. March 2, 2013. Archived from the original on March 16, 2013. Retrieved March 29, 2013.

^ Collin, Robbie (July 26, 2012). "The Lorax, review". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on September 17, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016.

^ Beard, Lanford (May 1, 2013). "Taylor Swift says 'I do' to 'New Girl'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 8, 2016. Retrieved August 4, 2016.

^ Busis, Hillary (September 27, 2013). "Taylor Swift will co-star in long-awaited adaptation of 'The Giver'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 21, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016.

^ Peterson, Price (March 31, 2014). "Taylor Swift Moves into NYC Apartment Built Over Mysterious River of Pink Slime". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on September 27, 2016. Retrieved July 31, 2016.

^ 1989 (Compact disc liner notes). Big Machine Records. 2014. BMRBD0500A.

^ Stutz, Colin (October 16, 2014). "Watch Taylor Swift's '1989' Secret Sessions Behind The Scenes Video". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 5, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016.

^ Mansfield, Brian (August 18, 2014). "Taylor Swift debuts 'Shake It Off,' reveals '1989' album". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 19, 2014. Retrieved August 19, 2014.

^ "1989 by Taylor Swift". Metacritic. Archived from the original on August 17, 2016. Retrieved August 15, 2016.

^ Caulfield, Keith (November 4, 2014). "Taylor Swift's "1989" debuts with 1.287 million copies sold". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 5, 2014. Retrieved November 4, 2014.

^ Swatman, Rachel (August 31, 2015). "Taylor Swift enters Guinness World Records 2016 with yet another record-breaking achievement". Guinness World Records. Archived from the original on September 3, 2015. Retrieved July 31, 2016.

^ Grein, Paul (December 25, 2014). "Taylor Swift Closes In on Beatles' Chart Record". Yahoo!. Retrieved June 29, 2020.

^ a b "Taylor Swift named IFPI Global Recording Artist of 2014". International Federation of the Phonographic Industry. February 23, 2015. Archived from the original on June 18, 2015. Retrieved February 24, 2015.

^ Trust, Gray (August 27, 2014). "Taylor Swift's 'Shake It Off' Debuts at No. 1 on Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 21, 2014. Retrieved August 27, 2014.

^ "Taylor Swift – Chart History: Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved September 18, 2016.

^ Trust, Gary (November 19, 2014). "Taylor Swift Makes Hot 100 History With 'Blank Space'". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 18, 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017.

^ Strecker, Erin (July 6, 2015). "Taylor Swift's 'Blank Space' the Fastest Video to Reach 1 Billion Views on Vevo". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 8, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016.

^ Strecker, Erin (May 21, 2015). "Taylor Swift's 'Bad Blood' Video Breaks Vevo Record". Billboard. Retrieved June 28, 2020.

^ Stutz, Colin (July 21, 2015). "2015 MTV Video Music Awards Nominees Revealed: Taylor Swift, Kendrick Lamar, Ed Sheeran & More". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 24, 2015. Retrieved August 15, 2016.

^ "Live Music's $20 Billion Year: The Grateful Dead's Fare Thee Well Reunion, Taylor Swift, One Direction Top Boxscore's Year-End". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 14, 2015.

^ "Taylor Swift: 2014 Billboard Woman of the Year". Billboard. October 10, 2014. Archived from the original on June 1, 2015. Retrieved April 11, 2015.

^ Payne, Chris (November 23, 2014). "Taylor Swift Wins Dick Clark Award of Excellence at 2014, Presented by Diana Ross". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 4, 2015. Retrieved April 11, 2015.

^ a b Jonze, Tim (February 25, 2015). "Taylor Swift wins international female solo artist at Brit awards 2015". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 1, 2016. Retrieved April 11, 2015.

^ Betts, Stephen L. (March 25, 2015). "2015 ACM Award Milestone Winners Include Swift, Lambert". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved April 11, 2015.

^ Lynch, Joe (February 19, 2016). "Taylor Swift Joins Elite Club to Win Grammy Album of the Year More Than Once: See the Rest". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 1, 2016. Retrieved July 31, 2016.

^ Lara, Maria Mercedes. "Calvin Harris Spends the Night at Taylor Swift's LA Home". People. Archived from the original on June 29, 2016. Retrieved May 24, 2015.

^ Rhodan, Maya (June 25, 2015). "Taylor Swift and Calvin Harris Are the Highest-Paid Celebrity Couple". Time. Archived from the original on June 29, 2016. Retrieved June 26, 2015.

^ Chiu, Melody (June 1, 2016). "Taylor Swift and Calvin Harris Split After 15 Months Together". People. Archived from the original on June 29, 2016. Retrieved June 1, 2016.

^ Spanos, Brittany (July 13, 2016). "Taylor Swift Co-Wrote Calvin Harris' Smash Hit 'This Is What You Came For'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 30, 2016. Retrieved July 31, 2016.

^ Lewis, Anna (July 15, 2016). "Tom Hiddleston finally tells us the truth about his relationship with Taylor Swift". Cosmopolitan. Archived from the original on July 17, 2016. Retrieved January 8, 2019.

^ Schillaci, Sophie (August 18, 2015). "Taylor Swift Tearfully Addresses Mom's Cancer Battle as She Performs 'Ronan'". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on August 27, 2016. Retrieved August 26, 2016.

^ Daly, Thomas J. (January 13, 2016). "Taylor Swift's Trademark Play". The National Law Review. Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved January 23, 2016.

^ "Taylor Swift Finally Reveals When She Started Dating Joe Alwyn in Lover Album". Yahoo!. August 23, 2019. Archived from the original on June 11, 2020. Retrieved June 11, 2020.

^ Lewis, Anna (November 10, 2017). "Taylor Swift and Tom Hiddleston: a timeline of their very short relationship". Cosmopolitan. Archived from the original on February 11, 2017. Retrieved January 8, 2019.

^ "Taylor Swift Still Happily Dating and 'Unconditionally' Supported by Joe Alwyn". Elle. France. Archived from the original on November 22, 2018. Retrieved November 29, 2018.

^ Bailey, Alyssa (November 1, 2016). "Which Ex Is This New Taylor Swift Song 'Better Man' About?". Elle. Archived from the original on November 10, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2016.

^ "Taylor Swift, pop princess, wins song of the year at the CMA Awards". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 9, 2017. Retrieved November 9, 2017.

^ "Discography Taylor Swift". Swedish Charts. Archived from the original on March 23, 2012. Retrieved July 11, 2014.

^ Trust, Gary (February 21, 2017). "Ed Sheeran Tops Hot 100, Katy Perry Debuts at No. 4 & Bruno Mars, Rihanna & The Weeknd All Hit Top 10". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 22, 2017. Retrieved February 22, 2017.

^ France, Lisa Respers (August 28, 2017). "MTV Video Music Awards 2017: Winners list". CNN. Archived from the original on August 27, 2017. Retrieved August 28, 2017.

^ Yahr, Emily (December 6, 2017). "Taylor Swift explains her blunt testimony during her sexual assault trial". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 1, 2020.

^ Gonzalez, Sandra; McLean, Scott; Weisfeldt, Sara; Gauk-Roger, Topher (August 15, 2017). "Taylor Swift wins court case". CNN. Archived from the original on August 19, 2017. Retrieved August 20, 2017.

^ "Taylor Swift wipes social media profiles, fuelling expectations of new album". The Daily Telegraph. August 18, 2017. Archived from the original on January 8, 2019. Retrieved August 19, 2019.

^ Aswad, Jem (August 24, 2017). "Taylor Swift's New Single, 'Look What You Made Me Do,' Arrives (Listen)". Variety. Archived from the original on August 28, 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017.

^ Peak positions:

"Taylor Swift Scores Fifth No. 1 Single". Australian Recording Industry Association. September 2, 2017. Archived from the original on September 2, 2017. Retrieved September 2, 2017.

"IRMA – Irish Charts". Irish Recorded Music Association. Archived from the original on June 14, 2017. Retrieved September 2, 2017.

"NZ Top 40 Singles Chart". Recorded Music NZ. September 4, 2017. Archived from the original on September 1, 2017. Retrieved September 1, 2017.

White, Jack (September 1, 2017). "Taylor Swift scores first Number 1 on the Official Singles Chart with 'LWYMMD'". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on September 2, 2017. Retrieved September 1, 2017.

^ a b Trust, Gary (September 11, 2017). "Taylor Swift at Nos. 1 & 4 on Billboard Hot 100, as Cardi B Moves Up to No. 2". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 21, 2017. Retrieved October 30, 2017.

^ Lewis, Randy (August 29, 2017). "Taylor Swift's 'Look What You Made Me Do' video bashes another YouTube record". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 29, 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017.

^ "Top 40 Rhythmic Future Releases". All Access Media Group. Archived from the original on October 23, 2017. Retrieved October 23, 2017.

^ "Taylor Swift holds No. 1 for second week". Australian Recording Industry Association. September 9, 2017. Archived from the original on September 17, 2017. Retrieved October 7, 2017.

^ Brandle, Lars (October 20, 2017). "Taylor Swift's 'Gorgeous' New Single Has Arrived: Listen". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 20, 2017. Retrieved December 7, 2017.

Iasimone, Ashley; Brandle, Lars (November 3, 2017). "Taylor Swift Debuts 'Call It What You Want': Watch Lyric Video". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 5, 2017. Retrieved December 7, 2017.

"BBC – Radio 1 – Playlist". BBC Radio 1. Archived from the original on January 12, 2018. Retrieved January 12, 2018.

^ "Official: Taylor Swift's 'Reputation' Album Sells 1.2M Copies in US During First Week". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 30, 2017. Retrieved May 29, 2018.

^ Brandle, Lars (November 20, 2017). "Taylor Swift's 'Reputation' Rules Australia's Albums Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 20, 2017. Retrieved December 2, 2017.

^ "Taylor Swift Chart History". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 7, 2017. Retrieved December 2, 2017.

^ Levine, Robert (November 22, 2017). "Taylor Swift Schools the Music Industry Once Again, While Streaming Services Wring Their Hands". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 30, 2017. Retrieved December 2, 2017.

^ Powers, Ann (November 10, 2019). "The Old Taylor's Not Dead". NPR. Retrieved June 29, 2020.

^ Aswad, Jem (November 12, 2017). "Taylor Swift Strips Things Down for 'Saturday Night Live' Performances (Watch)". Variety. Archived from the original on November 15, 2017. Retrieved November 18, 2017.

^ "Taylor Swift Chart History". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 8, 2018. Retrieved April 7, 2018.

^ Trust, Gary. "Taylor Swift's 'New Year's Day' Goes to Country Radio: Is Country Ready for It?". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 5, 2017. Retrieved April 13, 2018.

Braca, Nina. "Taylor Swift to Release 'Delicate' Music Video at iHeart Radio Music Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 14, 2018. Retrieved April 13, 2018.

^ Hudak, Joseph. "Sugarland Announce New Album 'Bigger,' Taylor Swift Collaboration". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 14, 2018. Retrieved April 13, 2018.

^ Stubblebine, Allison (November 13, 2017). "Taylor Swift Announces First Round of Reputation Stadium Tour Dates". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 14, 2017. Retrieved November 18, 2017.

^ Frankenberg, Eric (November 30, 2018). "Taylor Swift's Reputation Stadium Tour Breaks Record for Highest-Grossing U.S. Tour". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 1, 2018. Retrieved December 2, 2018.

^ Frankenberg, Eric (December 6, 2018). "Taylor Swift Closes Reputation Stadium Tour with $345 Million". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 9, 2018. Retrieved December 22, 2018.

^ McIntyre, Hugh (December 6, 2018). "These Are The 10 Highest-Grossing Tours of 2018". Forbes. Archived from the original on December 7, 2018. Retrieved December 22, 2018.

^ a b Havens, Lyndsey (October 9, 2018). "Taylor Swift Breaks an All-Time AMA Record – And Urges People to Vote in Midterm Elections". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 10, 2018. Retrieved October 10, 2018.

^ Wang, Amy X. (November 19, 2018). "Taylor Swift's New Record Deal Affects Thousands of Other Musicians". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on November 26, 2018. Retrieved November 26, 2018.

Willman, Chris (August 27, 2018). "Taylor Swift Stands to Make Music Business History as a Free Agent". Variety. Archived from the original on August 29, 2018. Retrieved August 29, 2018.

Aswad, Jem; Willman, Chris (November 19, 2018). "Taylor Swift Signs New Deal With Universal Music Group". Variety. Archived from the original on November 19, 2018. Retrieved November 19, 2018.

^ Reitman, Shelby (November 30, 2018). "Taylor Swift Shares Reputation Stadium Tour 'Surprise' Songs Playlist". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 4, 2019. Retrieved June 17, 2019.

^ Stiernberg, Bonnie (December 31, 2018). "Taylor Swift's 'Reputation' Hits Netflix: Twitter Reacts". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 4, 2019. Retrieved June 16, 2019.

^ McKenna, Lyndsey (August 23, 2019). "Stream Taylor Swift's New Album, 'Lover'". NPR. Retrieved September 10, 2019.

^ Trust, Gary (May 6, 2019). "Lil Nas X's 'Old Town Road' Tops Billboard Hot 100 For Fifth Week, Taylor Swift's 'Me!' Vaults to No. 2". Billboard. Retrieved June 14, 2019.

^ McIntyre, Hugh (April 27, 2019). "Taylor Swift's 'Me!' Music Video Has Already Broken A Very Important YouTube Record". Forbes. Retrieved June 14, 2019.

^ Vanderhoof, Erin (August 23, 2019). "Taylor Swift's Lover Could Hold the Key to Pop Music's Survival". Vanity Fair. Retrieved January 9, 2019.

^ "Billboard Staffers Discuss Taylor Swift's No. 2 Hot 100 Debut For 'You Need to Calm Down'". Billboard. June 25, 2019. Retrieved September 10, 2019.

^ Trust, Gary (August 12, 2019). "Lil Nas X's 'Old Town Road' Leads Billboard Hot 100 for 19th Week, Ariana Grande & Social House's 'Boyfriend' Debuts in Top 10". Billboard. Retrieved August 12, 2019.

^ Shaffer, Claire (July 23, 2019). "Taylor Swift Releases Intimate New Song 'The Archer'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved September 10, 2019.

^ Stiernberg, Bonnie (August 16, 2019). "Taylor Swift Releases 'Lover': Stream It Now". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 16, 2019. Retrieved August 16, 2019.

^ "Lover by Taylor Swift". Metacritic. Retrieved September 4, 2019.

^ Caulfield, Keith (September 1, 2019). "Official: Taylor Swift's 'Lover' Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard 200 Chart With 867,000 Units Earned in First Week in U.S." Billboard. Archived from the original on September 1, 2019. Retrieved September 2, 2019.

^ Caulfield, Keith (September 1, 2019). "Official: Taylor Swift's 'Lover' Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard 200 Chart With 867,000 Units Earned in First Week in U.S." Billboard. Retrieved September 1, 2019.

^ Sisario, Ben (November 8, 2019). "Taylor Swift's 'Lover' Is No. 1, but Falls Short of a Million Sales". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 4, 2019. Retrieved September 4, 2019.

^ Trust, Gary (September 3, 2019). "All 18 Songs From Taylor Swift's New Album 'Lover' Chart On the Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved September 10, 2019.

^ Grein, Paul (August 26, 2019). "12 Records That Were Set at the 2019 VMAs". Billboard. Retrieved January 11, 2020.

^ "MTV VMAs 2019 Winners: See the Full List Here". Pitchfork. August 27, 2019. Retrieved August 27, 2019.

^ "Arashi Best-Of Tops Taylor Swift for IFPI's Best-Selling Album of 2019". Billboard. March 19, 2020. Retrieved March 21, 2020.

^ Cirisano, Tatiana (March 2, 2020). "Taylor Swift Crowned IFPI's Global Best-Selling Artist". Billboard. Retrieved March 2, 2020.

^ a b Grady, Constance (September 1, 2019). "The Taylor Swift/Scooter Braun controversy, explained". Vox. Retrieved August 23, 2019.

^ "Taylor Swift wants to re-record her old hits". BBC News. August 22, 2019. Retrieved August 22, 2019.

^ Aniftos, Rania (November 14, 2019). "Taylor Swift Says Scooter Braun & Scott Borchetta Won't Let Her Perform Her Old Songs at 2019 AMAs". Billboard. Retrieved November 15, 2019.

^ Aswad, Jem (November 15, 2019). "Big Machine Records Denies Taylor Swift's Claims of Blocking Music Use". Variety. Retrieved November 15, 2019.

^ Monroe, Jazz (November 15, 2019). "Taylor Swift's Ex-Label Denies She's Banned From Playing Old Songs on TV". Pitchfork. Retrieved November 15, 2019.

^ Blistein, Jon (November 15, 2019). "Big Machine, Taylor Swift Camp Spar Over American Music Awards, Netflix Controversy". Rolling Stone. Retrieved November 15, 2019.

^ Cirisano, Tatiana (November 18, 2019). "Taylor Swift Cleared by Big Machine to Perform Old Songs at AMAs". Billboard. Retrieved November 23, 2019.

^ Henderson, Cydney (April 23, 2020). "Taylor Swift Slams Big Machine's New Unauthorized Live Album as 'Shameless Greed'". USA Today. Retrieved April 23, 2020.

^ Kreps, Daniel (April 23, 2020). "Taylor Swift Decries Impending Release of Unauthorized 2008 Live Album". Rolling Stone. Retrieved April 23, 2020.

^ "Billboard's Top 125 Artists of All Time: The Beatles, Rolling Stones, Elton John, Mariah Carey, Madonna & More". November 14, 2019.

^ Aniftos, Rania (November 15, 2019). "Taylor Swift Releases 'Beautiful Ghosts,' Co-Written With Andrew Lloyd Webber for 'Cats' Film". Billboard. Retrieved November 15, 2019.

^ Kaufman, Gil (December 5, 2019). "Cancel All Your Holiday Plans, Taylor Swift Is About to Drop a New Christmas Song". Billboard. Retrieved December 5, 2019.

^ "Look What the Cats Trailer Dragged In". GQ. July 18, 2019. Retrieved August 27, 2019.

^ Rooney, David (December 18, 2019). "'Cats': Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 20, 2019. Retrieved December 21, 2019.

^ Mamo, Heran (January 15, 2020). "Taylor Swift 'Miss Americana' Netflix Doc Has a Release Date & We're So Ready for It". Billboard. Retrieved January 19, 2020.

^ "Miss Americana (2020)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved February 2, 2020.

^ Willman, Chris (January 21, 2020). "Taylor Swift: No Longer 'Polite at All Costs'". Variety. Retrieved January 21, 2020.

^ Willman, Chris (February 6, 2020). "Taylor Swift Moves to Universal Music Publishing Group with New Pact". Variety. Retrieved February 6, 2020.

^ Peters, Mitchell (February 17, 2020). "Taylor Swift Teases 'The Man -- Live from Paris' Song & Video Release Date". Billboard. Retrieved February 18, 2020.

^ Aniftos, Rania (February 27, 2020). "Watch Taylor Swift Manspread and Mark a Wall Standing Up in Mind-Blowing 'The Man' Video". Billboard. Retrieved February 28, 2020.

^ Kreps, Daniel (April 17, 2020). "Taylor Swift Cancels All 2020 Tour Dates Due to Coronavirus". Rolling Stone. Retrieved April 17, 2020.

^ Bloom, Madison (May 17, 2020). "Listen to Taylor Swift's 'City of Lover' Film Soundtrack". Pitchfork. Retrieved May 20, 2020.

^ Petski, Denise (June 7, 2020). "YouTube Reschedules Virtual Commencement Ceremony With The Obamas, Beyoncé Due To George Floyd Memorial Service – Watch". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved June 29, 2020.

^ a b Lynch, Joe (June 26, 2020). "Taylor Swift Calls Out U.S. Census for Transgender Erasure". Billboard. Retrieved June 29, 2020.

^ Harrison, Ellie (July 23, 2020). "Taylor Swift to release surprise new album Folklore". The Independent. Retrieved July 23, 2020.

^ Lipshutz, Jason (July 24, 2020). "Taylor Swift's 'Folklore': There's Nothing Quiet About This Songwriting Tour De Force". Billboard. Retrieved July 24, 2020.

^ Cairns, Dan (March 5, 2009). "Swift rise of the anti-diva". The Australian. Archived from the original on December 24, 2014. Retrieved July 2, 2012.

^ Bream, Jon (December 7, 2007). "Music: OMG! Taylor's senior year". Star Tribune. Archived from the original on July 12, 2015. Retrieved July 1, 2012.

^ a b Newman, Melinda (December 19, 2008). "Taylor Swift Sessions Interview". AOL. Archived from the original on October 9, 2012. Retrieved March 25, 2011.

^ "Swift starts world tour in Asia, pushes "Speak Now' in NY". Country Standard Time. October 23, 2007. Archived from the original on November 13, 2012. Retrieved July 1, 2012.

^ "News : 20 Questions With Taylor Swift". CMT. November 12, 2007. Archived from the original on November 17, 2014. Retrieved April 18, 2012.

^ McCafferty, Dennis (April 13, 2008). "Taylor's Swift rise". USA Weekend. Archived from the original on November 14, 2012. Retrieved April 17, 2012.

^ "Interview with Taylor Swift". Time. April 23, 2009. Archived from the original on October 23, 2013. Retrieved July 1, 2012.

^ "Taylor Swift Style: Singer Won't Take Her Clothes Off, Wants People To Focus On Music". HuffPost. October 23, 2012. Archived from the original on January 4, 2015. Retrieved January 4, 2015.

^ "InStyle meets country singing sensation Taylor Swift". InStyle UK. October 26, 2010. Archived from the original on May 27, 2013. Retrieved May 29, 2012.

^ Bonaguro, Alison (July 25, 2011). "News : Offstage: Taylor Swift Plays Dixie Chicks for a Dixie Chick". CMT. Archived from the original on November 13, 2012. Retrieved July 1, 2012.

^ Roland, Tom (December 2, 2011). "Taylor Swift: Billboard's Woman of the Year". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 3, 2013. Retrieved July 1, 2012.

^ "Taylor Swift Goes Record Shopping with EW". Entertainment Weekly. October 15, 2010. Archived from the original on March 29, 2015. Retrieved October 23, 2012.

^ "Taylor Swift's Favorite Music". The Oprah Winfrey Show. Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved October 23, 2012.

^ a b Mansfield, Brian (October 23, 2010). "Taylor Swift learns to 'Speak Now,' reveal her maturity". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 4, 2012. Retrieved July 1, 2012.

^ "Rolling in the Trophies? – Adele". People. February 6, 2012. Archived from the original on June 1, 2012. Retrieved July 3, 2012.

^ "Taylor Swift Goes Record Shopping with EW". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 2, 2013. Retrieved July 1, 2012.

^ "Our Interview with Taylor Swift" (Blog). Channelguidemagblog.com. November 2, 2008. Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved February 25, 2013.

^ Van Meter, Jonathan (January 17, 2012). "Taylor Swift: The Single Life". Vogue. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved July 3, 2012.

^ Adams, Cameron (May 16, 2013). "Taylor Swift is happy to be your break-up musician". News.com.au. Archived from the original on May 19, 2013. Retrieved June 10, 2013.

^ Vena, Jocelyn (January 26, 2009). "Taylor Swift Blogs About 'Life-Changing' Cameo On 'CSI,' Britney Spears Poster". MTV. Archived from the original on April 4, 2015. Retrieved April 11, 2015.

^ "Taylor Swift Loves Hanson". Fox.com.au. May 9, 2013. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved April 11, 2015.

^ "Taylor Swift Tweets Her Love of Dashboard Confessional". Taste of Country. April 1, 2011. Archived from the original on May 1, 2013. Retrieved October 23, 2012.

^ Bonaguro, Alison (August 10, 2011). "News : Offstage: Taylor Swift Covers Fall Out Boy". CMT. Archived from the original on November 13, 2012. Retrieved October 23, 2012.

^ "See Taylor Swift's List of Music You Should Hear". Amazon.com. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. Retrieved October 23, 2012.

^ "Taylor Swift's 'musical crush' Justin Timberlake helps her end historic Staples Center run". LA Times. August 27, 2015. Retrieved March 28, 2020.

^ "'Anything That Connects': A Conversation With Taylor Swift". NPR Music. October 31, 2014. Retrieved October 26, 2019.

^ Eells, Josh (September 8, 2014). "The Reinvention of Taylor Swift". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 4, 2016. Retrieved June 8, 2016.

^ Rogers, Ray (May 25, 2013). "Taylor Swift: Billboard Music Award Wins Were a 'Wonderful Feeling'". Billboard. Retrieved June 2, 2019.

^ Richards, Will (October 30, 2019). "Pete Wentz and Lana Del Rey are Taylor Swift's favourite lyricists". NME. Retrieved May 14, 2020.

^ Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Taylor Swift | Biography & History". AllMusic. Retrieved April 14, 2020.

^ a b Sheffield, Rob (September 21, 2017). "All 129 of Taylor Swift's Songs, Ranked". Rolling Stone. Retrieved October 13, 2019.

^ "Taylor Swift Biography". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 9, 2012. Retrieved July 30, 2012.

^ Carson, Sarah (October 24, 2016). "The Story of Taylor Swift: 10 years at the top in her own lyrics". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved September 14, 2019.

^ Cooper, Peter (October 26, 2014). "Taylor Swift reaches a turning point with '1989'". The Tennessean. Archived from the original on September 24, 2016. Retrieved April 11, 2015.

^ "Women Who Rock: The 50 Greatest Albums of All Time: Taylor Swift, 'Speak Now'". Rolling Stone. June 22, 2012. Archived from the original on July 12, 2012. Retrieved July 30, 2012.

^ "Pop and Rock Listings July 22 – 28". The New York Times. July 21, 2011. Archived from the original on January 28, 2012. Retrieved July 12, 2012.

^ a b c Petridis, Alexis (March 6, 2009). "Taylor Swift: Fearless". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on October 16, 2013. Retrieved June 24, 2012.

^ a b Schillaci, Sophie A. (August 25, 2011). "Taylor Swift at Staples Center: Concert Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016.

^ Powers, Ann (October 25, 2010). "Album review: Taylor Swift's 'Speak Now'". Los Angeles Times (Blog). Archived from the original on October 28, 2010. Retrieved October 25, 2010.

^ Sheffield, Rob (October 26, 2010). "Speak Now". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 18, 2011. Retrieved June 15, 2012.

^ Weber, Theon (November 3, 2010). "The Iceberg Songs of Taylor Swift". The Village Voice. Archived from the original on November 4, 2015. Retrieved November 3, 2010.

^ Powers, Ann (October 30, 2014). "The Many New Voices Of Taylor Swift". NPR Music. Retrieved October 26, 2019.

^ Reed, James (October 24, 2010). "Swift's ascent continues with arrival of new album". Boston Globe. Archived from the original on September 27, 2016. Retrieved August 23, 2016.

^ "Taylor Swift gets mixed reviews at Grammys". The Tennessean (Blog). February 1, 2010. Archived from the original on July 13, 2015. Retrieved June 24, 2012.

^ Roland, Tom (October 15, 2010). "Taylor Swift: The Billboard Cover Story". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 18, 2010. Retrieved July 3, 2012.

^ Caramanica, Jon (October 20, 2010). "Taylor Swift Is Angry, Darn It". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 11, 2012. Retrieved June 24, 2012.

^ "Taylor Swift on Performing, Her Friends, and Favorite Songs". Teen Vogue. June 27, 2011. Archived from the original on July 5, 2018. Retrieved March 5, 2019.

^ Farley, Christopher John (October 22, 2010). "Taylor Swift's Solo Act". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on February 1, 2015. Retrieved May 24, 2012.

^ Caramanica, Jon (October 20, 2010). "Taylor Swift Is Angry, Darn It". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 11, 2012. Retrieved July 2, 2012.

^ "John Mayer: Taylor Swift's 'Dear John' Song 'Humiliated Me'". Rolling Stone. June 6, 2012. Archived from the original on June 23, 2012. Retrieved June 24, 2012.

^ Weber, Theon (November 3, 2010). "The Iceberg Songs of Taylor Swift". The Village Voice. Archived from the original on November 4, 2015. Retrieved July 30, 2012.

^ "Stop Asking Taylor Swift to Apologize for Writing Songs About Ex-Boyfriends – The Cut". New York. November 16, 2012. Archived from the original on November 27, 2012. Retrieved February 25, 2013.

^ "Her Song: Talking Taylor Swift – Post Rock". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 11, 2011. Retrieved July 30, 2012.

^ Dominus, Susan (November 16, 2012). "The Many Insecurities of Taylor Swift". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 17, 2016.

^ "Cover Preview: Taylor Swift Fights Back About Her Love Life, the Hyannis Port House—and Has Words for Tina Fey and Amy Poehler". Vanity Fair. March 5, 2013. Archived from the original on August 8, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016.

^ Willman, Chris (October 10, 2010). "Princess Crossover". New York. Archived from the original on July 27, 2013. Retrieved July 1, 2012.

^ Kelly, James (August 26, 2009). "Taylor Swift writing her own songs and rules". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved July 30, 2012.

^ Yuan, Jada (December 30, 2009). "Microwaving a tragedy: The marriage of romance and romanticism in '00s pop". Las Vegas Weekly. Archived from the original on December 21, 2013. Retrieved August 17, 2012.

^ Rotman, Natalie (January 9, 2009). "Colbie Caillat has 'Breakthrough' with sophomore CD". Reading Eagle. Archived from the original on December 21, 2013. Retrieved August 17, 2012.

^ a b Weber, Theon (November 3, 2010). "The Iceberg Songs of Taylor Swift". The Village Voice. New York. Archived from the original on July 7, 2012. Retrieved July 12, 2012.

^ Rosen, Jody (November 13, 2008). "Fearless". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 15, 2012. Retrieved July 1, 2012.

^ Keefe, Jonathan (October 22, 2012). "Taylor Swift: Red". Slant Magazine. Archived from the original on December 5, 2014. Retrieved February 25, 2013.

^ Coscarelli, Joe (April 26, 2019). "Taylor Swift Releases 'Me!,' a New Song Featuring Brendon Urie". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 15, 2019. Retrieved June 20, 2019.

^ Twersky, Carolyn (February 27, 2020). "Every Easter Egg in Taylor Swift's New Music Video "The Man": As always, there are a ton". Seventeen. Retrieved May 13, 2020.

^ Anitai, Tamar (August 27, 2010). "Video Premiere: Taylor Swift, 'Mine'". MTV News. Archived from the original on April 29, 2019.

^ cmt.com staff (May 4, 2011). "Taylor Swift's "Mean" Video Debuts Friday". CMT. Archived from the original on June 19, 2019. Retrieved June 19, 2019.

^ Bonaguro, Alison (May 6, 2011). "OFFSTAGE: Taylor Swift Isn't "Mean" at All, Director Says". CMT News. Archived from the original on June 19, 2019. Retrieved June 20, 2019.

^ Swift, Taylor (November 29, 2011). "E! Online Will Debut "Ours" Music Video Fridaz December 2nd!". taylorswift.com. Archived from the original on December 2, 2011. Retrieved June 20, 2019.

^ Iasimone, Ashley (December 4, 2011). "Taylor Swift Gives Behind-the-Scenes Look at 'Ours' Video – Webisode One". Taste of Country. Archived from the original on June 19, 2019.

^ Tailor, Leena (September 1, 2017). "Exclusive: Taylor Swift's Director Joseph Kahn on How Her Image Invokes a Double Standard: 'She's a Genius'". etonline.com. Archived from the original on June 19, 2019.

^ O'Connell, Michael (October 9, 2015). "Taylor Swift and Jimmy Fallon Among Early Emmy Winners". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 19, 2019.

^ Forbes, Jihan (May 14, 2015). "Peep Taylor Swift's Star-Studded Cast for Her 'Bad Blood' Music Video". The Fashion Spot. Retrieved May 13, 2020.

^ Kruh, Nancy (June 9, 2018). "Sugarland's Steamy 'Babe' Video Treatment Was Taylor Swift's Idea: 'She Reached Out to Us'". People. Archived from the original on May 2, 2019.

^ Spanos, Brittany (April 25, 2019). "Watch Taylor Swift, Brendon Urie's Colorful 'ME!' Video". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 26, 2019. Retrieved April 25, 2019.

^ Moore, Sam (August 23, 2019). "Watch Taylor Swift's colourful new video for 'Lover'". NME. Archived from the original on August 27, 2019. Retrieved August 27, 2019.

^ Zemler, Emily (June 17, 2019). "Watch Taylor Swift Reunite With Katy Perry in 'You Need to Calm Down' Video". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 17, 2019. Retrieved June 17, 2019.

^ Mylrea, Hannah (February 28, 2020). "Every incredible Easter Egg in Taylor Swift's 'The Man' video". NME. Retrieved March 9, 2020.

^ Spanos, Brittany; Legaspi, Althea (July 24, 2020). "Taylor Swift Blends Fantastical With Personal in 'Cardigan' Video". Rolling Stone. Retrieved July 27, 2020.

^ a b Meddings, Jacqui (October 31, 2014). "Taylor Swift is our new cover goddess". Cosmopolitan. Archived from the original on July 14, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016.

^ Davis, Allison P. (June 28, 2013). "The Taylor Swift Slut-Shaming Continues – The Cut". New York. Archived from the original on October 12, 2013. Retrieved November 17, 2013.

^ Chang, Bee-Shyuan (March 15, 2013). "Taylor Swift Gets Some Mud on Her Boots". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 22, 2013. Retrieved June 10, 2013.

^ "On the Road with Best Friends Taylor Swift and Karlie Kloss". Vogue. February 13, 2015. Archived from the original on November 4, 2015. Retrieved November 10, 2015.

^ Dauphin, Chuck (March 24, 2015). "Ray Stevens Returns With 'Taylor Swift Is Stalkin' Me'". Billboard. Retrieved August 21, 2019.

^ Willman, Chris (January 23, 2020). "Taylor Swift Opens Up About Overcoming Struggle With Eating Disorder". Variety. Retrieved January 25, 2020.

^ Willman, Chris (October 17, 2012). "Taylor Swift Tapes VH1 'Storytellers'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 23, 2012. Retrieved February 25, 2013.

^ Moss, Hilary (April 2, 2012). "Michelle Obama Honors Taylor Swift, Taylor Swift So Honored". New York. Archived from the original on May 28, 2013. Retrieved March 6, 2013.

^ Pacella, Megan (April 15, 2012). "Taylor Swift Reflects on Meeting First Lady Michelle Obama". Taste of Country. Archived from the original on April 14, 2012. Retrieved April 15, 2012.

^ Sisario, Ben (November 5, 2014). "Sales of Taylor Swift's '1989' Intensify Streaming Debate". The New York Times. Retrieved July 5, 2020.

^ Berg, Madeline (November 18, 2015). "Taylor Swift Vs. Katy Perry: Which Star Rules Social Media?". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 27, 2016. Retrieved July 23, 2016.

^ "Taylor Swift (@taylorswift)". Instagram. Retrieved July 5, 2020.

^ "Taylor Swift (@taylorswift13)". Twitter. Retrieved July 5, 2020.

^ "Taylor Swift". YouTube. Retrieved July 5, 2020.

^ Strecker, Erin (January 27, 2015). "Read Taylor Swift's Sweet Message to Bullied Fan". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 30, 2015. Retrieved January 31, 2015.

^ France, Lisa Respers (January 3, 2015). "Taylor Swift's year-end gift video brings all the feels". CNN. Retrieved July 6, 2020.

^ Stein, Jeannine (November 18, 2011). "Taylor Swift weighs in on being a role model". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 15, 2012. Retrieved April 18, 2012.

^ McKnight, Jenni (May 20, 2013). "Billboard Music Awards: Taylor Swift thanks her fans for being her 'longest and best relationship'". Metro. Archived from the original on April 10, 2015. Retrieved April 4, 2015.

^ Vincent, Alice (November 3, 2017). "Taylor Swift: the rise, fall and re-invention of America's sweetheart". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Retrieved July 5, 2020.

^ Buoniconti, Joanna. "From "America's sweetheart" to "Miss Americana," Taylor Swift is at her most vulnerable in latest Netflix documentary". Amherst Wire. Retrieved July 5, 2020.

^ "19-Year-Old Superstar Taylor Swift Remains Humble". Voice of America. November 2, 2009. Retrieved July 5, 2020.

^ Parr, Shawn (September 23, 2011). "Staying True To Yourself: The Humble Brand That Is Taylor Swift". Fast Company. Retrieved July 5, 2020.

^ Sclafani, Tony (October 25, 2010). "Why Taylor Swift's good girl image sells". Today. Retrieved July 5, 2020.

^ "The old Taylor Swift is dead ... but is she really?". Young Post. Retrieved July 5, 2020.

^ Jo Sales, Nancy; Diehl, Jessica (April 2013). "Taylor Swift's Telltale Heart". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on January 30, 2017. Retrieved February 4, 2017.

^ Nisha Lilia Diu (April 3, 2011). "Taylor Swift: 'I won't do sexy shoots'". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on October 30, 2012. Retrieved February 4, 2017.

^ Kessler, Zara (November 5, 2014). "Taylor Swift's Sexual Temptation". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on July 28, 2016. Retrieved July 24, 2016.

^ "15 Times Taylor Swift Proved She Is A Style Icon". Minq.com. October 31, 2014. Retrieved July 5, 2020.

^ "The Ultimate Taylor Swift–Style Guide to Fall Fashion". More. Retrieved July 5, 2020.

^ Holt, Emily (July 1, 2011). "American Idols: Icons of Stateside Style – Vogue Daily". Vogue. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved June 15, 2012.

^ "People's Best Dressed, Taylor Swift Best Dressed 2014". People. September 17, 2014. Archived from the original on February 20, 2016. Retrieved December 1, 2015.

^ Powell, Hannah Lyons (February 24, 2015). "Taylor Swift wins Woman of the Year award – ELLE Style Awards 2015". Elle. Archived from the original on September 27, 2016. Retrieved December 1, 2015.

^ Roy, Jessica (May 18, 2015). "Taylor Swift Tops the 2015 Maxim Hot 100". Maxim. Archived from the original on December 21, 2015. Retrieved December 1, 2015.

^ Brodsky, Rachel (June 13, 2019). "Taylor Swift Confirms Seventh Studio Album, 'Lover'". The Recording Academy. Retrieved May 13, 2020.

^ "Taylor Swift, titan of pop music, announces new album". The Jakarta Post. Agence France-Presse. August 24, 2017. Retrieved May 13, 2020.

^ "Taylor Swift: the country queen is dead, long live the pop princess". The Herald. June 19, 2015. Retrieved May 13, 2020.

^ Roland, Tom (July 7, 2016). "Love Story: The Impact of Taylor Swift's First Decade in Music". Billboard. Retrieved December 31, 2019.

^ a b Smith, Neil (June 22, 2015). "Five ways Taylor Swift is changing the world". BBC. Retrieved December 31, 2019.

^ Catucci, Nick (August 23, 2019). "Taylor Swift Reaches For New Heights of Personal and Musical Liberation on 'Lover'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved May 20, 2020.

^ Tannembaum, Rob (September 12, 2014). "4 Ways Billboard Woman of the Year Taylor Swift Changed Country Music". Billboard. Retrieved December 31, 2019.

^ O'Connor, Roisin (October 18, 2018). "Half of all new guitar players are women, a study has found". The Independent. Retrieved May 13, 2020.

^ Ritchie, Mike (March 8, 2020). "Why Taylor Swift is making the ukulele cool again". The Herald. Retrieved March 9, 2020.

^ Ingham, Tim (May 4, 2020). "Global recorded music industry revenues topped $20bn last year – but streaming growth slowed". Music Business Worldwide. Retrieved June 29, 2020.

^ Savage, Mark (May 4, 2020). "Billie Eilish and Taylor Swift boost music sales". BBC News. Retrieved June 29, 2020.

^ Sutherland, Mark (December 13, 2019). "'I come with opinions about how we can better our industry': Taylor Swift - The Music Week interview". Music Week. Retrieved April 27, 2020.

^ Singh-Kurtz, Sangeeta; Kopf, Dan (August 23, 2019). "Taylor Swift is the only artist who still sells CDs". Quartz. Retrieved July 2, 2020.

^ Knopper, Steve (November 8, 2014). "Taylor Swift's Label Head Explains Spotify Removal". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 21, 2015. Retrieved April 11, 2015.

^ Peters, Mitchell (June 21, 2015). "Taylor Swift Pens Open Letter Explaining Why '1989' Won't Be on Apple Music". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 22, 2015. Retrieved June 22, 2015.

^ Halperin, Shirley (June 21, 2015). "Apple Changes Course After Taylor Swift Open Letter: Will Pay Labels During Free Trial". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 22, 2015. Retrieved June 22, 2015.

^ Rosen, Christopher (June 25, 2015). "Taylor Swift is putting 1989 on Apple Music". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 26, 2015. Retrieved June 25, 2015.

^ McIntyre, Hugh (June 21, 2015). "Taylor Swift's Letter To Apple: Stern, Polite, And Necessary". Forbes. Retrieved December 31, 2019.

^ "Taylor Swift returns to Spotify on the day Katy Perry's album comes out". BBC News. June 9, 2017. Archived from the original on June 9, 2017. Retrieved June 9, 2017.

^ Wang, Amy X. (November 19, 2018). "Taylor Swift's New Record Deal Affects Thousands of Other Musicians". Rolling Stone. Retrieved May 14, 2020.

^ Livni, Ephrat (December 14, 2019). "Taylor Swift calls out "the unregulated world of private equity. Quartz. Retrieved May 14, 2020.

^ Kilpatrick, Mary (July 17, 2018). "Why Taylor Swift is a feminist icon". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved May 20, 2020.

Ebbitt, Kathleen (May 21, 2015). "Taylor Swift is my feminist hero". Global Citizen. Retrieved May 20, 2020.

Savage, Mark (December 13, 2019). "Taylor Swift blasts 'toxic male privilege' during Woman of the Decade speech". BBC. Retrieved May 20, 2020.

Greenwald, David (February 16, 2016). "Taylor Swift tops Grammys with historic, feminist album of the year win". The Oregonian. Retrieved May 20, 2020.

Croissant, Morgane (February 16, 2016). "Every feminist can get behind Taylor Swift's Grammy speech. Here's why". Matador Network. Archived from the original on October 14, 2016. Retrieved May 20, 2020.

^ "Gov. Dayton Proclaims Friday 'Taylor Swift Day' In Minnesota". CBS Minnesota. August 31, 2018. Retrieved February 15, 2020.

^ "Taylor Swift Will Receive First-Ever Woman of the Decade Honor at Billboard's Women in Music". Billboard. November 18, 2019. Retrieved December 31, 2019.

^ Elizabeth, De (November 24, 2019). "Taylor Swift Is Named Artist of the Decade at AMAs 2019". Teen Vogue. Retrieved December 31, 2019.

^ Rosa, Christopher (December 24, 2019). "Taylor Swift Is the Artist of the Decade—Whether You Like It or Not". Glamour. Retrieved March 28, 2020.

^ Larocca, Courteney (December 31, 2019). "Why Taylor Swift is the greatest artist of the decade". Insider. Retrieved March 28, 2020.

^ Parham, Jason (December 31, 2019). "The 10 Best Artists of a Decade That Atomized Music". Wired. Retrieved March 28, 2020.

^ Zoladz, Lindsay. "Taylor Swift Bent the Music Industry to Her Will". Vulture. Retrieved December 31, 2019.

^ Asmelash, Lea; Andrew, Scottie (December 31, 2019). "The 10 artists who transformed music this decade". CNN. Retrieved January 1, 2020.

^ Nurick, Jen (April 22, 2020). "Why Taylor Swift has become one of the world's biggest sustainable fashion influencers". Vogue. Retrieved April 23, 2020.

^ Collins, Katie (December 19, 2019). "Taylor Swift is still the most influential person on Twitter in 2019". CNET. Retrieved July 7, 2020.

^ "Taylor Swift album cover boosts vintage Polaroid sales". The New Zealand Herald. August 9, 2015. Retrieved January 1, 2020.

^ a b Artaius, James (February 11, 2019). "Fujifilm instax cameras sales hit 900,000 a month, thanks to Taylor Swift". Digital Camera World. Retrieved January 1, 2019.

^ Snapes, Laura (October 9, 2018). "Spike in voter registrations after Taylor Swift pro-Democrat Instagram post". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved July 7, 2020.

^ Rosen, Jody (March 11, 2020). "Jack Antonoff Is Only Making Music With Friends". The New York Times. Retrieved March 14, 2020.

^ Thompson, Gayle (February 10, 2020). "Kelsea Ballerini Credits Taylor Swift With Inspiring Her to Move to Nashville". CBS Interactive. Retrieved April 27, 2020.

^ Wass, Mike (November 25, 2015). "Popping Up: Ruth B". Idolator. Retrieved June 25, 2020.

^ Gawley, Paige (October 10, 2018). "Camila Cabello Gushes Over Taylor Swift Deserving Everything She's Achieved (Exclusive)". Entertainment Tonight. Retrieved January 1, 2020.

^ "The Chainsmokers On Rising Hit "Roses. Idolator. November 23, 2015. Retrieved December 11, 2015.

^ "Selena Gomez Inspired By Taylor Swift On Her New "Grown-Up" Album 'Stars Dance'". Capital FM. July 25, 2013. Retrieved June 25, 2020.

^ "Taylor Swift is an inspiration to me: Ellie Goulding". The Indian Express. December 16, 2013. Archived from the original on April 17, 2016. Retrieved March 29, 2016.

^ Rowley, Glenn (April 7, 2020). "Conan Gray Talks Taylor Swift In Apple Music Interview". Billboard. Retrieved April 7, 2020.

^ "Halsey, Todrick Hall & More Send Messages of Support To Taylor Swift". Billboard. June 30, 2019. Retrieved April 5, 2020.

^ Aniftos, Rania (April 8, 2020). "Niall Horan Names Taylor Swift 'One of the Greatest Songwriters of Her Generation'". Billboard. Retrieved April 10, 2020.

^ "Maren Morris Interview on 'Girl' Album and Tour". Billboard. March 8, 2019. Retrieved April 27, 2020.

^ Schiller, Rebecca (September 3, 2018). "Get to Know 'Somebody Special' Singer-Songwriter Nina Nesbitt: Watch". Billboard. Retrieved January 1, 2020.

^ Cerio, Michael (February 11, 2020). "Exclusive: Finneas on His Secret Sibling Language With Billie Eilish and Those Taylor Swift Rumors". Radio.com. Retrieved February 11, 2020.

^ Nesvig, Kara (April 23, 2020). "Taylor Swift Praised "HSM" Series Star Olivia Rodrigo's "Cruel Summer" Cover". Teen Vogue. Retrieved May 13, 2020.

^ Appleford, Steve (August 23, 2013). "Behind Tegan and Sara's Big Night With Taylor Swift". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 21, 2016.

^ 73 Questions With Troye Sivan. Vogue. June 20, 2019. Retrieved January 16, 2020 – via YouTube.

^ Akingbade, Tobi (March 2, 2019). "The Vamps reveal they really want to work with Taylor Swift again: 'She revolutionised music'". Metro. Retrieved June 25, 2020.

^ "Taylor Swift". The Recording Academy. Archived from the original on August 12, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016.

^ "American Music Awards 2019: Taylor Swift takes artist of the decade in record-breaking haul". The Guardian. November 25, 2019. Retrieved December 14, 2019.

^ Grein, Paul (April 23, 2019). "Taylor Swift Leads the Top Billboard Music Award Winners of All Time". Billboard. Retrieved December 14, 2019.

^ "Biggest-selling album worldwide for a solo artist (current)". Guinness World Records. Retrieved June 21, 2020.

^ Lewis, Randy (November 4, 2013). "Taylor Swift to receive rare Pinnacle Award at CMA Awards Nov. 6". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved May 13, 2020.

^ "Taylor Swift Nashville Tickets". Excite. Archived from the original on February 3, 2015. Retrieved February 2, 2015.

^ Friedlander, Whitney (September 10, 2015). "Taylor Swift, Jimmy Fallon Among Juried Emmy Award Winners". Variety. Archived from the original on September 15, 2015. Retrieved August 3, 2016.

^ Shelburne, Craig (October 18, 2010). "Taylor Swift Named NSAI's Songwriter-Artist of the Year". CMT. Archived from the original on March 14, 2014. Retrieved February 2, 2015.

^ "Songwriters Hall of Fame". Songwriters Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved February 2, 2015.

^ "Bob Dylan – 100 Greatest Songwriters of All Time". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 2, 2017. Retrieved August 28, 2017.

^ "Greatest of All Time Artists". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 14, 2019. Retrieved November 15, 2019.

^ Jolly, Nathan (November 17, 2019). "Why Taylor Swift is to blame for latest twist in music rights drama". News.com.au. Retrieved November 17, 2019.

^ "10 Life mantras by Taylor Swift to live by". India Today. December 13, 2016. Archived from the original on February 9, 2019. Retrieved July 16, 2020.

^ Lipshutz, Jason (December 11, 2019). "Billboard Woman of the Decade Taylor Swift: 'I Do Want My Music to Live On'". Billboard. Retrieved December 11, 2019.

^ Universal Music Group (February 6, 2020). "Taylor Swift Signs Exclusive Global Publishing Agreement With Universal Music Publishing Group". PR Newswire. Retrieved April 21, 2020.

^ Caulfield, Keith (January 23, 2015). "Billboard 200 Chart Moves: Taylor Swift's '1989' Hits 4 Million in U.S. Sales". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 7, 2017. Retrieved January 18, 2017.

^ "RIAA – Top Artists (Digital Singles)". Recording Industry Association of America. Archived from the original on November 4, 2015. Retrieved March 2, 2018.

^ O'Malley Greenburg, Zack (December 23, 2019). "From Taylor Swift To Dr. Dre: The 10 Top-Earning Musicians Of The Decade". Forbes. Archived from the original on December 30, 2019. Retrieved December 31, 2019.

^ Rolli, Bryan (March 14, 2020). "Taylor Swift's 'Shake It Off' Receives RIAA Diamond Certification". Forbes. Retrieved March 15, 2020.

^ "Taylor Swift's Reputation Stadium Tour Breaks Record for Highest-Grossing U.S. Tour". Billboard. November 30, 2018. Retrieved June 29, 2020.

^ Aswad, Jem (November 22, 2019). "U2 Tops Rolling Stones, Ed Sheeran as Highest-Grossing Touring Artist of the Decade". Variety. Retrieved June 29, 2020.

^ Nicks, Stevie (April 29, 2010). "The 2010 Time 100: Taylor Swift". Time. Archived from the original on November 29, 2013. Retrieved April 22, 2012.

Vena, Jocelyn (April 16, 2015). "Taylor Swift, Kanye West, Kim Kardashian Make Time's 100 Most Influential People List". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 25, 2016. Retrieved September 1, 2016.

Jensen, Erin (April 17, 2019). "Dwayne Johnson, Taylor Swift, Gayle King, more cover Time's 100 most influential people issue". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 17, 2019. Retrieved April 17, 2019.

^ Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (December 14, 2011). "The Top-Earning Women in Music 2011". Forbes. Archived from the original on October 27, 2015. Retrieved August 3, 2016.

Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (December 12, 2012). "The Top-Earning Women in Music 2012". Forbes. Archived from the original on December 12, 2012. Retrieved August 3, 2016.

Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (December 11, 2013). "The Top-Earning Women in Music 2013". Forbes. Archived from the original on December 15, 2013. Retrieved August 3, 2016.

Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (November 4, 2014). "The Top-Earning Women in Music 2014". Forbes. Archived from the original on November 27, 2014. Retrieved August 3, 2016.

Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (November 4, 2015). "The World's Highest-Paid Women in Music 2015". Forbes. Archived from the original on November 4, 2015. Retrieved November 5, 2015.

^ Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (November 2, 2016). "The World's Highest-Paid Women in Music 2016". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 25, 2019. Retrieved July 13, 2019.

Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (November 20, 2017). "The World's Highest-Paid Women in Music 2017". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved July 13, 2019.

Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (November 19, 2018). "The World's Highest-Paid Women in Music 2018". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved July 13, 2019.

^ "Highest annual earnings ever for a female pop star". Guinness World Records. Archived from the original on November 12, 2017. Retrieved November 15, 2017.

^ Mercuri, Monica (July 10, 2019). "Taylor Swift Is The World's Highest-Paid Celebrity With $185 Million in 2019". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 12, 2019. Retrieved July 13, 2019.

"Celebrity 100 2011". Forbes. Archived from the original on September 5, 2016. Retrieved September 1, 2016.

Schumann, Rebecka (May 26, 2013). "Forbes Lists Top 100 Most Powerful Celebrities in 2013: Oprah Winfrey Takes Number One Spot ". International Business Times. Archived from the original on June 15, 2016. Retrieved September 1, 2016.

Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (June 29, 2015). "Celebrity 100: The World's Highest-Paid Superstars of 2015". Forbes. Archived from the original on September 1, 2016. Retrieved September 1, 2016.

Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (July 11, 2016). "Taylor Swift Is The World's Top-Earning Celebrity With $170 Million in 2016". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016.

^ "#8 Taylor Swift". Forbes. Archived from the original on January 10, 2011. Retrieved July 27, 2015.

^ Stampler, Laura (December 8, 2014). "This is the Shortlist for Time's Person of the Year 2014". Time. Archived from the original on December 12, 2016. Retrieved July 15, 2017.

^ Dockterman, Eliana (December 6, 2017). "'I Was Angry.' Taylor Swift on What Powered Her Sexual Assault Testimony". Time. Archived from the original on December 6, 2017. Retrieved December 7, 2017.

^ Cuccinello, Hayley C. (June 4, 2019). "From Taylor Swift To Katrina Lake, America's Richest Self-Made Women Under 40". Forbes. Retrieved June 9, 2019.

^ Brown, Dalvin (March 8, 2020). "International Women's Day: Google celebrates with a Doodle and animated video". USA Today. Retrieved March 9, 2020.

^ Couch, Robbie (March 2, 2015). "Taylor Swift Named Most Charitable Celeb For Supporting Feminist Causes, Education, More". HuffPost. Archived from the original on October 21, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016.

^ Pacella, Megan (June 13, 2012). "Taylor Swift Receives Star of Compassion Award". Taste of Country. Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved November 27, 2015.

^ Cooper, Brittany Joy (March 27, 2012). "Taylor Swift to Receive 'Big' Honor From Michelle Obama at Kids' Choice Awards". Taste of Country. Archived from the original on July 12, 2012. Retrieved August 30, 2012.

^ "Taylor Swift Honored With RFK Center's Ripple of Hope Award". PR Newswire. December 4, 2012. Archived from the original on May 7, 2013. Retrieved February 25, 2013.

^ Lee, Ken (August 9, 2009). "Taylor Swift donates $100,000 to victims of Iowa Flood". People. Archived from the original on June 7, 2009. Retrieved September 9, 2009.

^ Moran, Jonathon (March 8, 2009). "Kylie to play at Sound Relief with Coldplay, Midnight Oil". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on September 24, 2016. Retrieved December 30, 2009.

^ Vena, Jocelyn (January 26, 2010). "Better Than Ezra 'Honored' By Taylor Swift's Performance Of 'Breathless' At Haiti Telethon". MTV. Archived from the original on August 12, 2014. Retrieved August 30, 2012.

^ Talbott, Chris (May 7, 2010). "Taylor Swift Donates $500,000 to Nashville Flood Relief". CNS News. Archived from the original on December 8, 2015.

^ Lewis, Randy (May 23, 2011). "Taylor Swift benefit concert raises more than $750,000 for tornado victims". Los Angeles Times (Blog). Archived from the original on April 6, 2012. Retrieved April 18, 2012.

^ "Taylor Swift gives $1m to help Louisiana flood relief efforts". The Guardian. August 17, 2016. Archived from the original on August 17, 2016. Retrieved August 17, 2016.

^ Muhammad, Latifah (December 9, 2016). "Taylor Swift Donates $100,000 to Dolly Parton Fire Fund". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on January 13, 2017. Retrieved January 11, 2017.

^ Blair, Olivia (September 4, 2019). "Taylor Swift Makes 'Very Sizeable Donation' To A Food Bank in Houston After Hurricane Harvey". Elle. Archived from the original on July 2, 2019. Retrieved July 3, 2019.

^ Paulson, Dave (March 5, 2020). "Taylor Swift donates $1 million for Tennessee tornado relief". The Tennessean. Retrieved March 5, 2020.

^ "Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame". Nashville Songwriters Foundation. Retrieved July 2, 2020.

^ "Taylor Swift becomes namesake of Hendersonville High School auditorium". The Tennessean. September 23, 2010. Archived from the original on July 12, 2015. Retrieved May 29, 2011.

^ McKinley, James C. (May 17, 2012). "Taylor Swift to Donate $4 Million to the Country Hall of Fame". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 5, 2012. Retrieved July 1, 2012.

^ Golden, Zara (October 1, 2012). "And The Taylor Swift VH1 Storytellers Contest Winner Is ... Harvey Mudd College! – | VH1 Tuner". VH1. Archived from the original on July 12, 2015. Retrieved April 21, 2014.

^ "$100,000 Gift from Taylor Swift Provides Vital Support to Nashville Symphony". Nashville Symphony. December 16, 2013. Retrieved April 7, 2020.

^ Sanz, Cynthia (December 14, 2009). "Taylor Swift Gives Big as She Turns 20 – Good Deeds, Taylor Swift". People. Archived from the original on June 17, 2012. Retrieved May 29, 2012.

^ Urban, Mike (October 14, 2011). "Taylor Swift donates 6,000 books to Reading Library". Reading Eagle. Archived from the original on May 12, 2012. Retrieved May 29, 2012.

^ Cooper, Brittany Joy (February 2, 2012). "Taylor Swift Donates 14,000 Books to Nashville Public Library". Taste of Country. Archived from the original on June 17, 2012. Retrieved May 29, 2012.

^ Zhu, Danielle (November 17, 2015). "Taylor Swift partners with Scholastic to donate 25,000 books". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 14, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016.

^ Lynch, Joe (February 24, 2015). "Taylor Swift Donated $50k to NYC Public Schools From 'Welcome to New York' Sales". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 5, 2019. Retrieved July 3, 2019.

^ a b "A Timeline of Taylor Swift's Generosity". Billboard. October 23, 2018. Retrieved April 5, 2020.

^ Wheeler, Brad (August 27, 2019). "Toronto music school's new funding model finds swift support". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on August 29, 2019. Retrieved August 29, 2019.

^ "Taylor Swift Helps With 'Delete Online Predators' Campaign". Nash Country Weekly. September 18, 2007. Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved November 29, 2015.

^ "Sound Matters – Taylor Swift". Sound Matters. Archived from the original on August 20, 2012. Retrieved November 29, 2015.

^ "19th Annual Elton John AIDS Foundation Academy Awards Viewing Party". PR Newswire. Archived from the original on December 8, 2015. Retrieved November 10, 2015.

"Taylor Swift Teams Up With UNICEF Tap Project Initiative". Taste of Country. March 17, 2011. Archived from the original on May 1, 2013. Retrieved August 7, 2012.

"Taylor Swift Among Participants in MusiCares Back To School Charity Auction". Rttnews.com. July 28, 2011. Archived from the original on May 17, 2013. Retrieved August 7, 2012.

"Feed America With George Clooney's Bowl". Looktothestars.org. Archived from the original on September 29, 2012. Retrieved August 7, 2012.

^ "Taylor Swift and ACM Lifting Lives present $50,000 donation to St. Jude". The Tennessean. June 13, 2011. Archived from the original on July 12, 2015. Retrieved May 29, 2012.

^ "New and Hot Video: Taylor Swift Debuts 'Ronan' at Stand Up To Cancer Benefit". Rolling Stone. September 8, 2012. Archived from the original on September 13, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012.

^ "2012 Do Something Award Nominees Include Taylor Swift, Miranda Lambert, and Blake Shelton". Sounds Like Nashville. July 18, 2012. Retrieved July 2, 2020.

^ Knight, Joey (May 17, 2014). "Dick Vitale holds annual fundraiser for pediatric cancer". Tampa Bay Times. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved July 30, 2014.

^ George, John. "Taylor Swift donates $50K to CHOP to help teens with cancer". The Business Journals (Blog). Archived from the original on July 12, 2015. Retrieved June 5, 2014.

^ Von Dobeneck, Monica. "South Middleton girl gets toys for fellow patients at St. Jude Children's Research Hospital". The Patriot-News. Archived from the original on November 5, 2012. Retrieved August 30, 2012.

Ryan, Kiki (August 27, 2010). "Swift's soldier visit". Politico. Archived from the original on November 12, 2012. Retrieved August 30, 2012.

"Taylor Swift performs at Vanderbilt children's hospital, in pictures". The Tennessean (Blog). December 25, 2009. Archived from the original on July 12, 2015. Retrieved June 10, 2013.

^ Hardiman, Tim (April 20, 2007). "Taylor Swift Encourages Teen Volunteers". CMT. Archived from the original on November 13, 2012. Retrieved July 1, 2012.

^ Daly, Rhian (January 2, 2018). "Taylor Swift bought pregnant fan a house after learning she was homeless". NME. Retrieved July 26, 2020.

^ Vagianos, Alanna (August 17, 2017). "This Is How Taylor Swift's Donations Will Impact Sexual Assault Survivors". HuffPost. Retrieved April 7, 2020.

^ Aniftos, Rania (April 8, 2019). "Taylor Swift Donates $113,000 to Tennessee Equality Project to Fight Anti-LGBTQ Bills". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 9, 2019. Retrieved April 9, 2019.

^ "Taylor Swift Makes a Generous Donation to GLAAD in Support of the LGBTQ Community". GLAAD (Press release). June 1, 2019. Archived from the original on June 1, 2019. Retrieved June 1, 2019.

^ Akingbade, Tori (March 30, 2020). "Taylor Swift donates $3000 to support fans during coronavirus outbreak". NME. Retrieved March 30, 2020.

^ Grow, Kory (April 1, 2020). "How Taylor Swift Is Helping a Small Nashville Record Store Survive". Rolling Stone. Retrieved April 1, 2020.

^ "Taylor Swift responded to the leaked 'Famous' phone call with Kanye West by urging fans to instead focus on coronavirus aid". March 24, 2020. Retrieved May 13, 2020.

^ "Taylor Swift Donates Signed "Lover" Guitar To Raise Fund For Coronavirus Relief". May 7, 2020. Retrieved May 20, 2020.

^ Havens, Lyndsey (April 18, 2020). "Taylor Swift Sings Heart-Rending 'Soon You'll Get Better' During 'One World' Concert". Billboard. Retrieved April 19, 2020.

^ Bailey, Alyssa (June 9, 2020). "Taylor Swift Tweeted About the Black Lives Matter Movement and Urged People to Vote". Elle. Retrieved July 27, 2020.

^ Hoby, Hermione (August 23, 2014). "Taylor Swift: 'Sexy? Not on my radar'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on June 10, 2015. Retrieved May 29, 2015.

^ a b c Snapes, Laura (August 24, 2019). "Taylor Swift: 'Pop music can feel like it's The Hunger Games, and like we're gladiators'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on August 24, 2019. Retrieved August 24, 2019.

^ O'Malley, Katie (December 13, 2019). "Taylor Swift Just Delivered Her Most Feminist, Badass Speech Yet And We're Giving It A Standing Ovation". Elle. Retrieved July 27, 2020.

^ "The Original 300+ Time's Up Signatories". Time's Up. October 21, 2019. Retrieved May 20, 2020.

^ Every Woman Counts: Funny Taylor Swift Interview Before 2008 ACM Awards. Lifetime. May 30, 2008. Archived from the original on November 5, 2010. Retrieved August 2, 2016.

^ "Taylor Swift sends 'love' and 'respect' to LGBT fans". BBC News. June 4, 2018. Archived from the original on November 14, 2018. Retrieved December 15, 2018.

^ Wickman, Forrest (October 20, 2014). "Taylor Swift's Pro-Gay "Welcome to New York" Takes Her Further Than Ever From Nashville". Slate. Retrieved July 27, 2020.

^ Hiatt, Brian (September 18, 2019). "The Rolling Stone Interview Taylor Swift". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 18, 2019. Retrieved September 19, 2019.

^ Malkin, Marc (March 10, 2010). "Portia Joins Ellen To Stop The Hate". E!. Archived from the original on January 22, 2013. Retrieved July 12, 2012.

^ Koday, Dan (March 28, 2009). "Taylor Swift's Mission: Take a Stand Against Hate!". Seventeen. Archived from the original on January 29, 2014. Retrieved August 30, 2012.

^ a b Hawgood, Alex (November 5, 2010). "For Gays, New Songs of Survival". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 9, 2012. Retrieved August 7, 2012.

^ Mayberry, Carly; Tourtellotte, Bob (August 4, 2011). "MTV adds social activism category to VMAs". Reuters. Archived from the original on October 12, 2012. Retrieved August 30, 2012.

^ Wiest, Brianna (June 18, 2016). "Taylor Swift Posts Handwritten Message to Families of Orlando Victims". Teen Vogue. Retrieved July 27, 2020.

^ Lynch, John (March 23, 2018). "Taylor Swift Shares Support For Gun a Control Reform In Instagram Post". Business Insider. Retrieved May 20, 2020.

^ Zimmerman, Amy (October 8, 2018). "Taylor Swift Finally Got Political. Why Now?". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on October 9, 2018. Retrieved October 9, 2018.

^ Parkinson, Hannah Jane (October 8, 2018). "Taylor Swift finally makes a political intervention – will it sway voters?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 8, 2018. Retrieved October 9, 2018.

^ Buitrago, Juan (October 8, 2018). "What about her reputation? Taylor Swift's political stance draws praise, backlash". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 8, 2018. Retrieved October 8, 2018.

^ France, Lisa Respers (October 9, 2018). "Voter registration reportedly spikes after Taylor Swift post". CNN. Archived from the original on October 9, 2018. Retrieved October 9, 2018.

^ Haag, Matthew (October 9, 2018). "Voter Registrations Spike as Deadlines Loom. Taylor Swift Had Something to Do With It". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 9, 2018. Retrieved October 10, 2018.

^ Beresford, Trilby (May 31, 2019). "Taylor Swift Pens Pride Letter to Tennessee Senator, Urges LGBTQ Protections". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 1, 2019. Retrieved June 1, 2019.

^ Willman, Chris (May 31, 2019). "Taylor Swift Urges Passage of Pro-LGBTQ Equality Act: 'I Reject the President's Stance'". Variety. Archived from the original on June 1, 2019. Retrieved June 1, 2019.

^ Daly, Rhian (August 27, 2019). "Taylor Swift calls on White House to respond to Equality Act petition in MTV VMAs acceptance speech". NME. Archived from the original on August 27, 2019. Retrieved August 27, 2019.

^ Aguirre, Abby (August 8, 2019). "Taylor Swift on Sexism, Scrutiny, and Standing Up for Herself". Vogue. Archived from the original on August 10, 2019. Retrieved August 11, 2019.

^ Lipshutz, Jason (August 27, 2019). "The 16 Best Moments from the 2019 MTV Video Music Awards". Billboard. Retrieved October 26, 2019.

^ Hosken, Patrick (June 15, 2020). "Taylor Swift Calls Supreme Court's LGBTQ+ Decision 'A Beautiful Step Forward'". MTV. Retrieved July 27, 2020.

^ Aniftos, Rania (May 7, 2020). "Taylor Swift Supports Justice for Ahmaud Arbery, Calls His Death 'Senseless, Cold Blooded, Racially Motivated'". Billboard. Retrieved May 13, 2020.

^ a b Parker, Ryan (May 29, 2020). "Taylor Swift Blasts Trump for "Shooting" Tweet: "We Will Vote You Out in November. The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved May 31, 2020.

^ Beaumont-Thomas, Ben (June 10, 2020). "Taylor Swift: 'Racial injustice has been ingrained in US state government'". The Guardian. Retrieved July 27, 2020.

^ Asmelash, Leah (June 14, 2020). "Taylor Swift says Confederate monuments in Tennessee make her sick". CNN. Retrieved July 27, 2020.

^ France, Lisa Respers (June 19, 2020). "Taylor Swift got educated on Juneteenth and wants you to be, too". CNN. Retrieved July 27, 2020.

^ "Taylor Swift at Top for Fourth Week". Great American Country. August 20, 2007. Archived from the original on December 21, 2013. Retrieved July 3, 2012.

^ Kaplan, Julee (January 29, 2009). "Taylor Swift Launches Sundress Line – Ready-to-Wear and Sportswear – Media". Women's Wear Daily. Archived from the original on July 29, 2013. Retrieved August 7, 2012.

^ "Taylor Swift to have greeting card line". USA Today. November 18, 2009. Archived from the original on December 14, 2009. Retrieved August 7, 2012.

^ Serpe, Gina (October 29, 2008). "Taylor Swift Gets All Dolled Up" (Blog). E!. Archived from the original on March 5, 2011. Retrieved September 20, 2010.

^ "Taylor Swift: NHL's New Spokesperson". AOL. February 3, 2009. Archived from the original on February 7, 2009. Retrieved September 20, 2010.

^ "Sony Electronics News and Information". Sony. April 26, 2010. Retrieved August 7, 2012.

^ Vomhof Jr., John. "Target lands Taylor Swift exclusive – Minneapolis / St. Paul Business Journal". The Business Journals. Archived from the original on July 12, 2015. Retrieved August 7, 2012.

^ Bratskeir, Anne (May 3, 2010). "Taylor Swift, a new CoverGirl". Newsday. Archived from the original on October 28, 2014. Retrieved August 7, 2012.

^ Nika, Colleen (July 3, 2012). "Taylor Swift to Launch Second Fragrance, 'Wonderstruck Enchanted'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 9, 2015. Retrieved December 3, 2015.

^ Malkin, Marc. "First Look Taylor Swift Flies High in New Target Commercial". E!. Archived from the original on January 22, 2013. Retrieved September 14, 2012.

^ "Taylor Swift Plans TV Appearances For 10/22 Launch Of "Red" Album, Paid Song Downloads Top 3.8 Million in Advance of Release". PR Newswire. October 17, 2012. Archived from the original on June 19, 2016. Retrieved August 2, 2016.

^ Hampp, Andrew (October 9, 2012). "Taylor Swift Teams With Walgreens For Exclusive Store To Promote 'Red'". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 21, 2013. Retrieved October 23, 2012.

^ Zmuda, Natalie; Parekh, Rupal (January 25, 2013). "Diet Coke Signs Taylor Swift As Brand Ambassador". Advertising Age. Archived from the original on October 22, 2015. Retrieved November 10, 2015.

^ DelliCarpini Jr., Gregory (May 29, 2013). "Taylor Swift Reveals Third Fragrance: Taylor by Taylor Swift". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved December 3, 2015.

^ Sciarretto, Amy (December 24, 2012). "Taylor Swift Is Photogenic in Sony Camera Commercial". Taste of Country. Archived from the original on December 8, 2015. Retrieved December 3, 2015.

^ "American Greetings Sends Taylor Swift Greeting Card Mobile App Abroad". PR Newswire. September 24, 2013. Archived from the original on December 8, 2015. Retrieved December 3, 2015.

^ "Taylor by Taylor Swift Made of Starlight ~ new fragrance". Now Smell This. November 29, 2013. Retrieved May 13, 2020.

^ Corosu, Irene (June 17, 2014). "AirAsia unveiled as the official airline of Taylor Swift's Red Tour throughout South East Asia". PHAR Partnerships. Archived from the original on January 16, 2016. Retrieved December 3, 2015.

^ "Qantas named exclusive official airline for Australia and New Zealand leg of Taylor Swift's The Red Tour". Qantas. August 21, 2013. Archived from the original on December 8, 2015. Retrieved December 3, 2015.

^ Reed, Chris (November 25, 2015). "Taylor Swift melts Cornetto's brand image in Asia" (Blog). Campaign Asia. Archived from the original on December 6, 2015. Retrieved December 3, 2015.

^ "Taylor Swift". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved November 20, 2014.

^ Mychaskiw, Marianne (October 1, 2014). "Taylor Swift Is Launching Her Fourth Fragrance!". InStyle. Archived from the original on January 7, 2015. Retrieved December 3, 2015.

^ Rutherford, Kevin (May 18, 2016). "How Taylor Swift's Apple Music Ads Helped Drake, Future, the Darkness and Jimmy Eat World". Billboard. Retrieved July 27, 2020.

^ McIntyre, Hugh. "Taylor Swift Has Signed A Multi-Year Deal With AT&T". Forbes. Archived from the original on September 11, 2018. Retrieved September 11, 2018.

^ "Taylor Swift Signed a 'Multi-Year' Deal with AT&T". Fortune. Archived from the original on September 11, 2018. Retrieved September 11, 2018.

^ Chen, Joyce (September 7, 2017). "Taylor Swift Spars With Andy Samberg, Steals Cookie Dough in Promo Video". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 11, 2018. Retrieved September 11, 2018.

^ "Taylor Swift Rides a Magical Caticorn in DirectTV NOW Commercial". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 11, 2018. Retrieved September 11, 2018.

^ "UPS Is The Official Delivery Partner For Taylor Swift's 6th Studio Album reputation" (Press release). Atlanta, Georgia. August 25, 2017. Retrieved May 13, 2020.

^ Mele, Sofia (August 22, 2018). "Taylor Swift Unveils Her Special-Edition Instax Camera: Watch the Videos". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 11, 2018. Retrieved September 11, 2018.

^ Collins, Katie (August 22, 2018). "Taylor Swift teases her special edition Instax camera in three videos". CNET. Archived from the original on September 11, 2018. Retrieved September 11, 2018.

^ "Capital One Announces Exclusive Partnership with 10-time GRAMMY Award-Winning Artist Taylor Swift" (Press release). McLean, Virginia: Cision. July 26, 2019. Retrieved July 26, 2019.

External links

 Wikiquote has quotations related to: Taylor Swift

Official website

Taylor Swift on IMDb

v

t

e

Taylor Swift

Awards and nominations

Discography

Live performances

Songs

Videography

Studio albums 
Taylor Swift

Fearless

Speak Now

Red

1989

Reputation

Lover

Folklore

Extended plays 
The Taylor Swift Holiday Collection

Beautiful Eyes

Live albums 
Speak Now World Tour – Live

Live from Clear Channel Stripped 2008

Television 
"Taylor Swift and Def Leppard"

Journey to Fearless

Concert tours 
Fearless

Speak Now

Red

1989

Reputation Stadium

Lover Fest

Related articles 
Wonderstruck

1989 (Ryan Adams album)

Austin Swift

Miss Americana

 Book

v

t

e

Taylor Swift songs

Discography

Songs

Taylor Swift 
"Tim McGraw"

"Picture to Burn"

"Teardrops on My Guitar"

"Should've Said No"

"Our Song"

The Taylor Swift Holiday Collection 
"Last Christmas"

"Santa Baby"

"Silent Night"

"White Christmas"

Fearless 
"Fearless"

"Fifteen"

"Love Story"

"White Horse"

"You Belong with Me"

"Breathe"

"You're Not Sorry"

"Forever & Always"

"Change"

Speak Now 
"Mine"

"Sparks Fly"

"Back to December"

"Speak Now"

"Dear John"

"Mean"

"The Story of Us"

"Enchanted"

"Innocent"

"Ours"

Speak Now World Tour – Live 
"Apologize"

"Drops of Jupiter"

"Bette Davis Eyes"

"I Want You Back"

"Long Live"

Red 
"State of Grace"

"Red"

"I Knew You Were Trouble"

"All Too Well"

"22"

"We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together"

"The Last Time"

"Everything Has Changed"

"Begin Again"

1989 
"Welcome to New York"

"Blank Space"

"Style"

"Out of the Woods"

"Shake It Off"

"Bad Blood"

"Wildest Dreams"

"New Romantics"

Reputation 
"...Ready for It?"

"End Game"

"I Did Something Bad"

"Delicate"

"Look What You Made Me Do"

"Gorgeous"

"Getaway Car"

"Call It What You Want"

"New Year's Day"

Lover 
"Cruel Summer"

"Lover"

"The Man"

"The Archer"

"Miss Americana & the Heartbreak Prince"

"Soon You'll Get Better"

"You Need to Calm Down"

"Me!"

Folklore 
"Cardigan"

"Exile"

Soundtrack songs 
"Crazier"

"Today Was a Fairytale"

"Safe & Sound"

"Eyes Open"

"Sweeter than Fiction"

"I Don't Wanna Live Forever"

"Beautiful Ghosts"

As a featured artist 
"Two Is Better Than One"

"Half of My Heart"

"Both of Us"

"Babe"

Other songs 
"Umbrella"

"Ronan"

"Highway Don't Care"

"Christmas Tree Farm"

"Only the Young"

Awards for Taylor Swift

v

t

e

Brit Award for International Female Solo Artist

Tracy Chapman (1989)

Sinéad O'Connor (1991)

Björk (1994)

K.d. lang (1995)

Björk (1996)

Sheryl Crow (1997)

Björk (1998)

Natalie Imbruglia (1999)

Macy Gray (2000)

Madonna (2001)

Kylie Minogue (2002)

Pink (2003)

Beyoncé (2004)

Gwen Stefani (2005)

Madonna (2006)

Nelly Furtado (2007)

Kylie Minogue (2008)

Katy Perry (2009)

Lady Gaga (2010)

Rihanna (2011)

Rihanna (2012)

Lana Del Rey (2013)

Lorde (2014)

Taylor Swift (2015)

Björk (2016)

Beyoncé (2017)

Lorde (2018)

Ariana Grande (2019)

Billie Eilish (2020)

v

t

e

CMA Entertainer of the Year

Eddy Arnold (1967)

Glen Campbell (1968)

Johnny Cash (1969)

Merle Haggard (1970)

Charley Pride (1971)

Loretta Lynn (1972)

Roy Clark (1973)

Charlie Rich (1974)

John Denver (1975)

Mel Tillis (1976)

Ronnie Milsap (1977)

Dolly Parton (1978)

Willie Nelson (1979)

Barbara Mandrell (1980)

Barbara Mandrell (1981)

Alabama (1982)

Alabama (1983)

Alabama (1984)

Ricky Skaggs (1985)

Reba McEntire (1986)

Hank Williams Jr. (1987)

Hank Williams Jr. (1988)

George Strait (1989)

George Strait (1990)

Garth Brooks (1991)

Garth Brooks (1992)

Vince Gill (1993)

Vince Gill (1994)

Alan Jackson (1995)

Brooks & Dunn (1996)

Garth Brooks (1997)

Garth Brooks (1998)

Shania Twain (1999)

Dixie Chicks (2000)

Tim McGraw (2001)

Alan Jackson (2002)

Alan Jackson (2003)

Kenny Chesney (2004)

Keith Urban (2005)

Kenny Chesney (2006)

Kenny Chesney (2007)

Kenny Chesney (2008)

Taylor Swift (2009)

Brad Paisley (2010)

Taylor Swift (2011)

Blake Shelton (2012)

George Strait (2013)

Luke Bryan (2014)

Luke Bryan (2015)

Garth Brooks (2016)

Garth Brooks (2017)

Keith Urban (2018)

Garth Brooks (2019)

v

t

e

CMA Female Vocalist of the Year

Loretta Lynn (1967)

Tammy Wynette (1968)

Tammy Wynette (1969)

Tammy Wynette (1970)

Lynn Anderson (1971)

Loretta Lynn (1972)

Loretta Lynn (1973)

Olivia Newton-John (1974)

Dolly Parton (1975)

Dolly Parton (1976)

Crystal Gayle (1977)

Crystal Gayle (1978)

Barbara Mandrell (1979)

Emmylou Harris (1980)

Barbara Mandrell (1981)

Janie Fricke (1982)

Janie Fricke (1983)

Reba McEntire (1984)

Reba McEntire (1985)

Reba McEntire (1986)

Reba McEntire (1987)

K. T. Oslin (1988)

Kathy Mattea (1989)

Kathy Mattea (1990)

Tanya Tucker (1991)

Mary Chapin Carpenter (1992)

Mary Chapin Carpenter (1993)

Pam Tillis (1994)

Alison Krauss (1995)

Patty Loveless (1996)

Trisha Yearwood (1997)

Trisha Yearwood (1998)

Martina McBride (1999)

Faith Hill (2000)

Lee Ann Womack (2001)

Martina McBride (2002)

Martina McBride (2003)

Martina McBride (2004)

Gretchen Wilson (2005)

Carrie Underwood (2006)

Carrie Underwood (2007)

Carrie Underwood (2008)

Taylor Swift (2009)

Miranda Lambert (2010)

Miranda Lambert (2011)

Miranda Lambert (2012)

Miranda Lambert (2013)

Miranda Lambert (2014)

Miranda Lambert (2015)

Carrie Underwood (2016)

Miranda Lambert (2017)

Carrie Underwood (2018)

Kacey Musgraves (2019)

v

t

e

CMA New Artist of the Year

Terri Gibbs (1981)

Ricky Skaggs (1982)

John Anderson (1983)

The Judds (1984)

Sawyer Brown (1985)

Randy Travis (1986)

Holly Dunn (1987)

Ricky Van Shelton (1988)

Clint Black (1989)

Garth Brooks (1990)

Travis Tritt (1991)

Suzy Bogguss (1992)

Mark Chesnutt (1993)

John Michael Montgomery (1994)

Alison Krauss (1995)

Bryan White (1996)

LeAnn Rimes (1997)

Dixie Chicks (1998)

Jo Dee Messina (1999)

Brad Paisley (2000)

Keith Urban (2001)

Rascal Flatts (2002)

Joe Nichols (2003)

Gretchen Wilson (2004)

Dierks Bentley (2005)

Carrie Underwood (2006)

Taylor Swift (2007)

Lady Antebellum (2008)

Darius Rucker (2009)

Zac Brown Band (2010)

The Band Perry (2011)

Hunter Hayes (2012)

Kacey Musgraves (2013)

Brett Eldredge (2014)

Chris Stapleton (2015)

Maren Morris (2016)

Jon Pardi (2017)

Luke Combs (2018)

Ashley McBryde (2019)

v

t

e

GLAAD Vanguard Award

Roseanne Barr & Tom Arnold (1993)

Aaron Spelling (1994)

Steve Tisch (1995)

Sidney Sheinberg (1996)

Cristina Saralegui (1997)

Cher (1998)

Whoopi Goldberg (1999)

Elizabeth Taylor (2000)

Shirley MacLaine (2002)

Eric McCormack (2003)

Antonio Banderas (2004)

Liza Minnelli (2005)

Charlize Theron (2006)

Jennifer Aniston (2007)

Janet Jackson (2008)

Kathy Griffin (2009)

Drew Barrymore (2010)

Kristin Chenoweth (2011)

Josh Hutcherson (2012)

Jennifer Lopez (2014)

Kerry Washington (2015)

Demi Lovato (2016)

Patricia Arquette (2017)

Britney Spears (2018)

Beyoncé & Jay Z (2019)

Taylor Swift (2020)

v

t

e

Grammy Award for Album of the Year

1959–1979 
The Music from Peter Gunn – Henry Mancini (1959)

Come Dance with Me! – Frank Sinatra (1960)

The Button-Down Mind of Bob Newhart – Bob Newhart (1961)

Judy at Carnegie Hall – Judy Garland (1962)

The First Family – Vaughn Meader (1963)

The Barbra Streisand Album – Barbra Streisand (1964)

Getz/Gilberto – Stan Getz & João Gilberto (1965)

September of My Years – Frank Sinatra (1966)

A Man and His Music – Frank Sinatra (1967)

Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band – The Beatles (1968)

By the Time I Get to Phoenix – Glen Campbell (1969)

Blood, Sweat & Tears – Blood, Sweat & Tears (1970)

Bridge over Troubled Water – Simon & Garfunkel (1971)

Tapestry – Carole King (1972)

The Concert for Bangladesh – George Harrison & Friends (1973)

Innervisions – Stevie Wonder (1974)

Fulfillingness' First Finale – Stevie Wonder (1975)

Still Crazy After All These Years – Paul Simon (1976)

Songs in the Key of Life – Stevie Wonder (1977)

Rumours – Fleetwood Mac (1978)

Saturday Night Fever – Various Artists (1979)

1980–2000 
52nd Street – Billy Joel (1980)

Christopher Cross – Christopher Cross (1981)

Double Fantasy – John Lennon & Yoko Ono (1982)

Toto IV – Toto (1983)

Thriller – Michael Jackson (1984)

Can't Slow Down – Lionel Richie (1985)

No Jacket Required – Phil Collins (1986)

Graceland – Paul Simon (1987)

The Joshua Tree – U2 (1988)

Faith – George Michael (1989)

Nick of Time – Bonnie Raitt (1990)

Back on the Block – Quincy Jones and Various Artists (1991)

Unforgettable... with Love – Natalie Cole (1992)

Unplugged – Eric Clapton (1993)

The Bodyguard – Whitney Houston (1994)

MTV Unplugged – Tony Bennett (1995)

Jagged Little Pill – Alanis Morissette (1996)

Falling into You – Celine Dion (1997)

Time Out of Mind – Bob Dylan (1998)

The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill – Lauryn Hill (1999)

Supernatural – Santana (2000)

2001–present 
Two Against Nature – Steely Dan (2001)

O Brother, Where Art Thou? – Various Artists (2002)

Come Away with Me – Norah Jones (2003)

Speakerboxxx/The Love Below – Outkast (2004)

Genius Loves Company – Ray Charles & Various Artists (2005)

How to Dismantle an Atomic Bomb – U2 (2006)

Taking the Long Way – Dixie Chicks (2007)

River: The Joni Letters – Herbie Hancock (2008)

Raising Sand – Robert Plant & Alison Krauss (2009)

Fearless – Taylor Swift (2010)

The Suburbs – Arcade Fire (2011)

21 – Adele (2012)

Babel – Mumford & Sons (2013)

Random Access Memories – Daft Punk (2014)

Morning Phase – Beck (2015)

1989 – Taylor Swift (2016)

25 – Adele (2017)

24K Magic – Bruno Mars (2018)

Golden Hour – Kacey Musgraves (2019)

When We All Fall Asleep, Where Do We Go? – Billie Eilish (2020)

v

t

e

Grammy Award for Best Music Video

1984−2000 
"Girls on Film"/"Hungry Like the Wolf" – Duran Duran (1984)

"Jazzin' for Blue Jean" – David Bowie (1985)

"We Are the World – The Video Event" – USA for Africa (1986)

"Brothers in Arms" – Dire Straits (1987)

"Leave Me Alone" – Michael Jackson (1990)

"Opposites Attract" – Paula Abdul (1991)

"Losing My Religion" – R.E.M. (1992)

"Digging in the Dirt" – Peter Gabriel (1993)

"Steam" – Peter Gabriel (1994)

"Love Is Strong" – The Rolling Stones (1995)

"Scream" – Michael Jackson & Janet Jackson (1996)

"Free as a Bird" – The Beatles (1997)

"Got 'til It's Gone" – Janet Jackson (1998)

"Ray of Light" – Madonna (1999)

"Freak on a Leash" – Korn (2000)

2001−present 
"Learn to Fly" – Foo Fighters (2001)

"Weapon of Choice" – Fatboy Slim featuring Bootsy Collins (2002)

"Without Me" – Eminem (2003)

"Hurt" – Johnny Cash (2004)

"Vertigo" – U2 (2005)

"Lose Control" – Missy Elliott featuring Ciara & Fatman Scoop (2006)

"Here It Goes Again" – OK Go (2007)

"God's Gonna Cut You Down" – Johnny Cash (2008)

"Pork and Beans" – Weezer (2009)

"Boom Boom Pow" – Black Eyed Peas (2010)

"Bad Romance" – Lady Gaga (2011)

"Rolling in the Deep" – Adele (2012)

"We Found Love" – Rihanna featuring Calvin Harris (2013)

"Suit & Tie" – Justin Timberlake featuring Jay Z (2014)

"Happy" – Pharrell Williams (2015)

"Bad Blood" – Taylor Swift featuring Kendrick Lamar (2016)

"Formation" – Beyoncé (2017)

"Humble" – Kendrick Lamar (2018)

"This Is America" – Childish Gambino (2019)

"Old Town Road" – Lil Nas X featuring Billy Ray Cyrus (2020)

Best Concept Music Video

(1988−1989) 
"Land of Confusion" – Genesis (1988)

"Fat" – "Weird Al" Yankovic (1989)

v

t

e

Grammy Award for Best Pop Vocal Album

Best Contemporary Album

(1968) 
Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band – The Beatles (1968)

Best Pop Album

(1995–2000) 
Longing in Their Hearts – Bonnie Raitt (1995)

Turbulent Indigo – Joni Mitchell (1996)

Falling into You – Celine Dion (1997)

Hourglass – James Taylor (1998)

Ray of Light – Madonna (1999)

Brand New Day – Sting (2000)

Best Pop Vocal Album

(2001–present) 
Two Against Nature – Steely Dan (2001)

Lovers Rock – Sade (2002)

Come Away with Me – Norah Jones (2003)

Justified – Justin Timberlake (2004)

Genius Loves Company – Ray Charles & Various Artists (2005)

Breakaway – Kelly Clarkson (2006)

Continuum – John Mayer (2007)

Back to Black – Amy Winehouse (2008)

Rockferry – Duffy (2009)

The E.N.D. – The Black Eyed Peas (2010)

The Fame Monster – Lady Gaga (2011)

21 – Adele (2012)

Stronger – Kelly Clarkson (2013)

Unorthodox Jukebox – Bruno Mars (2014)

In the Lonely Hour – Sam Smith (2015)

1989 – Taylor Swift (2016)

25 – Adele (2017)

÷ – Ed Sheeran (2018)

Sweetener – Ariana Grande (2019)

When We All Fall Asleep, Where Do We Go? – Billie Eilish (2020)

v

t

e

Grammy Award for Best Song Written for Visual Media

1988–2000 
"Somewhere Out There" – James Horner, Barry Mann & Cynthia Weil (songwriters) (1988)

"Two Hearts" – Phil Collins & Lamont Dozier (songwriters) (1989)

"Let the River Run" – Carly Simon (songwriter) (1990)

"Under the Sea" – Alan Menken & Howard Ashman (songwriters) (1991)

"(Everything I Do) I Do It for You" – Bryan Adams, Michael Kamen & Robert "Mutt" Lange (songwriters) (1992)

"Beauty and the Beast" – Howard Ashman & Alan Menken (songwriters) (1993)

"A Whole New World" – Alan Menken & Tim Rice (songwriters) (1994)

"Streets of Philadelphia" – Bruce Springsteen (songwriter) (1995)

"Colors of the Wind" – Alan Menken & Stephen Schwartz (songwriters) (1996)

"Because You Loved Me" – Diane Warren (songwriter) (1997)

"I Believe I Can Fly" – R. Kelly (songwriter) (1998)

"My Heart Will Go On" – James Horner & Will Jennings (songwriters) (1999)

"Beautiful Stranger" – Madonna & William Orbit (songwriters) (2000)

2001–present 
"When She Loved Me" – Randy Newman (songwriter) (2001)

"Boss of Me" – John Flansburgh & John Linnell (songwriters) (2002)

"If I Didn't Have You" – Randy Newman (songwriter) (2003)

"A Mighty Wind" – Christopher Guest, Eugene Levy & Michael McKean (songwriters) (2004)

"Into the West" – Annie Lennox, Fran Walsh & Howard Shore (songwriters) (2005)

"Believe" – Glen Ballard & Alan Silvestri (songwriters) (2006)

"Our Town" – Randy Newman (songwriter) (2007)

"Love You I Do" – Henry Krieger & Siedah Garrett (songwriters) (2008)

"Down to Earth" – Peter Gabriel & Thomas Newman (songwriters) (2009)

"Jai Ho" – Gulzar, A. R. Rahman & Tanvi Shah (songwriters) (2010)

"The Weary Kind" – Ryan Bingham & T Bone Burnett (songwriters) (2011)

"I See the Light" – Alan Menken & Glenn Slater (songwriters) (2012)

"Safe & Sound" – Taylor Swift, Joy Williams, John Paul White & T Bone Burnett (songwriters) (2013)

"Skyfall" – Adele Adkins & Paul Epworth (songwriters) (2014)

"Let It Go" – Kristen Anderson-Lopez & Robert Lopez (songwriters) (2015)

"Glory" – John Stephens, Lonnie Lynn & Che Smith (songwriters) (2016)

"Can't Stop the Feeling!" – Justin Timberlake, Max Martin & Johan Schuster (songwriters) (2017)

"How Far I'll Go" – Lin-Manuel Miranda (songwriter) (2018)

"Shallow" – Lady Gaga, Andrew Wyatt, Anthony Rossomando & Mark Ronson (songwriters) (2019)

"I'll Never Love Again" – Lady Gaga, Natalie Hemby, Hillary Lindsey & Aaron Raitiere (songwriters) (2020)

v

t

e

MTV Video Music Award for Video of the Year

1980s

1984 
The Cars — "You Might Think"

1985 
Don Henley — "The Boys of Summer"

1986 
Dire Straits — "Money for Nothing"

1987 
Peter Gabriel — "Sledgehammer"

1988 
INXS — "Need You Tonight/Mediate"

1989 
Neil Young — "This Note's for You"

1990s

1990 
Sinéad O'Connor — "Nothing Compares 2 U"

1991 
R.E.M. — "Losing My Religion"

1992 
Van Halen — "Right Now"

1993 
Pearl Jam — "Jeremy"

1994 
Aerosmith — "Cryin'"

1995 
TLC — "Waterfalls"

1996 
The Smashing Pumpkins — "Tonight, Tonight"

1997 
Jamiroquai — "Virtual Insanity"

1998 
Madonna — "Ray of Light"

1999 
Lauryn Hill — "Doo Wop (That Thing)"

2000s

2000 
Eminem — "The Real Slim Shady"

2001 
Christina Aguilera, Lil' Kim, Mýa and Pink — "Lady Marmalade"

2002 
Eminem — "Without Me"

2003 
Missy Elliott — "Work It"

2004 
Outkast — "Hey Ya!"

2005 
Green Day — "Boulevard of Broken Dreams"

2006 
Panic! at the Disco — "I Write Sins Not Tragedies"

2007 
Rihanna (featuring Jay-Z) — "Umbrella"

2008 
Britney Spears — "Piece of Me"

2009 
Beyoncé — "Single Ladies (Put a Ring on It)"

2010s

2010 
Lady Gaga — "Bad Romance"

2011 
Katy Perry — "Firework"

2012 
Rihanna (featuring Calvin Harris) — "We Found Love"

2013 
Justin Timberlake — "Mirrors"

2014 
Miley Cyrus — "Wrecking Ball"

2015 
Taylor Swift (featuring Kendrick Lamar) — "Bad Blood"

2016 
Beyoncé — "Formation"

2017 
Kendrick Lamar — "Humble"

2018 
Camila Cabello (featuring Young Thug) — "Havana"

2019 
Taylor Swift — "You Need to Calm Down"

Complete list

(1980s)

(1990s)

(2000s)

(2010s)

v

t

e

MTV Video Music Award for Best Pop Video

1990s

1999 
Ricky Martin — "Livin' la Vida Loca"

2000s

2000 
NSYNC — "Bye Bye Bye"

2001 
NSYNC — "Pop"

2002 
No Doubt (featuring Bounty Killer) — "Hey Baby"

2003 
Justin Timberlake — "Cry Me a River"

2004 
No Doubt — "It's My Life"

2005 
Kelly Clarkson — "Since U Been Gone"

2006 
P!nk — "Stupid Girls"

2008 
Britney Spears — "Piece of Me"

2009 
Britney Spears — "Womanizer"

2010s

2010 
Lady Gaga — "Bad Romance"

2011 
Britney Spears — "Till the World Ends"

2012 
One Direction — "What Makes You Beautiful"

2013 
Selena Gomez — "Come & Get It"

2014 
Ariana Grande (featuring Iggy Azalea) — "Problem"

2015 
Taylor Swift — "Blank Space"

2016 
Beyoncé — "Formation"

2017 
Fifth Harmony — "Down"

2018 
Ariana Grande — "No Tears Left to Cry"

2019 
Jonas Brothers — "Sucker"

v

t

e

MTV Video Music Award for Best Video with a Social Message

2011−present 
"Born This Way" by Lady Gaga (2011)

"Skyscraper" by Demi Lovato (2012)

"Same Love" by Macklemore & Ryan Lewis featuring Mary Lambert (2013)

"Pretty Hurts" by Beyoncé (2014)

"One Man Can Change the World" by Big Sean featuring Kanye West and John Legend (2015)

No award (2016)

"Scars to Your Beautiful" by Alessia Cara / "Light" by Big Sean featuring Jeremih / "Surefire" by John Legend / "Immigrants (We Get the Job Done)" by K'naan, Snow Tha Product, Riz Ahmed and Residente / "Black Spiderman" by Logic featuring Damian Lemar Hudson / "Stand Up/Stand N Rock #NoDAPL" by Taboo featuring Shailene Woodley (2017)

"This Is America" by Childish Gambino (2018)

"You Need to Calm Down" by Taylor Swift (2019)

v

t

e

Teen Choice Award for Choice Music Female Artist

Brandy (1999)

Britney Spears (2000)

Britney Spears (2001)

Britney Spears (2002)

Kelly Clarkson (2003)

Avril Lavigne (2004)

Kelly Clarkson (2005)

Kelly Clarkson (2006)

Fergie (2007)

Miley Cyrus (2008)

Taylor Swift (2009)

Lady Gaga (2010)

Taylor Swift (2011)

Taylor Swift (2012)

Demi Lovato (2013)

Ariana Grande (2014)

Demi Lovato (2015)

Selena Gomez (2016)

Ariana Grande (2017)

Camila Cabello (2018)

Billie Eilish (2019)

v

t

e

YouTube Music Awards

Ceremonies 
2013

2015

Hosts 
Jason Schwartzman and Reggie Watts (2013)

Tyler Oakley (2015)

Awards

Videos of the Year 
"I Got a Boy" by Girls' Generation (2013)

Artists of the Year 
Eminem (2013)

Responses of the Year 
"Radioactive" by Lindsey Stirling and Pentatonix (2013)

YouTube Phenomenons 
"I Knew You Were Trouble" by Taylor Swift (2013)

YouTube Breakthroughs 
Macklemore & Ryan Lewis (2013)

Innovations of the Year 
"See Me Standing" by DeStorm (2013)

Related articles 
Kia Motors

Spike Jonze

YouTube Awards

YouTube

v

t

e

IFPI Global Bestsellers of the Year

Artist of the Year 
One Direction (2013)

Taylor Swift (2014)

Adele (2015)

Drake (2016)

Ed Sheeran (2017)

Drake (2018)

Taylor Swift (2019)

Album of the Year 
Hybrid Theory by Linkin Park (2001)

The Eminem Show by Eminem (2002)

Come Away with Me by Norah Jones (2003)

Confessions by Usher (2004)

X&Y by Coldplay (2005)

High School Musical by Various Artists (2006)

High School Musical 2 by Various Artists (2007)

Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends by Coldplay (2008)

I Dreamed a Dream by Susan Boyle (2009)

Recovery by Eminem (2010)

21 by Adele (2011)

21 by Adele (2012)

Midnight Memories by One Direction (2013)

Frozen by Various Artists (2014)

25 by Adele (2015)

Lemonade by Beyoncé (2016)

÷ by Ed Sheeran (2017)

The Greatest Showman by Various Artists (2018)

Single of the Year 
"Girlfriend" by Avril Lavigne (2007)

"Lollipop" by Lil Wayne featuring Static Major (2008)

"Poker Face" by Lady Gaga (2009)

"Tik Tok" by Kesha (2010)

"Just the Way You Are" by Bruno Mars (2011)

"Call Me Maybe" by Carly Rae Jepsen (2012)

"Blurred Lines" by Robin Thicke featuring T.I. and Pharrell (2013)

"Happy" by Pharrell Williams (2014)

"See You Again" by Wiz Khalifa featuring Charlie Puth (2015)

"One Dance" by Drake featuring Wizkid and Kyla (2016)

"Shape of You" by Ed Sheeran (2017)

"Havana" by Camila Cabello featuring Young Thug (2018)

v

t

e

Billboard Year-End number one albums

1956–1975 
1956: Calypso – Harry Belafonte

1957: Music from My Fair Lady – Original Cast

1958: Music from My Fair Lady – Original Cast

1959: The Music from Peter Gunn – Henry Mancini

1960: Music from The Sound of Music – Original Cast

1961: Camelot – Original Cast

1962: West Side Story – Soundtrack

1963: West Side Story – Soundtrack

1964: Music from Hello, Dolly! – Original Cast

1965: Music from Mary Poppins – Soundtrack

1966: Whipped Cream & Other Delights – Herb Alpert & the Tijuana Brass

1967: More of the Monkees – The Monkees

1968: Are You Experienced – The Jimi Hendrix Experience

1969: In-A-Gadda-Da-Vida – Iron Butterfly

1970: Bridge over Troubled Water – Simon & Garfunkel

1971: Jesus Christ Superstar – Soundtrack

1972: Harvest – Neil Young

1973: The World Is a Ghetto – War

1974: Goodbye Yellow Brick Road – Elton John

1975: Greatest Hits – Elton John

1976–2000 
1976: Frampton Comes Alive! – Peter Frampton

1977: Rumours – Fleetwood Mac

1978: Saturday Night Fever – Soundtrack

1979: 52nd Street – Billy Joel

1980: The Wall – Pink Floyd

1981: Hi Infidelity – REO Speedwagon

1982: Asia – Asia

1983: Thriller – Michael Jackson

1984: Thriller – Michael Jackson

1985: Born in the U.S.A. – Bruce Springsteen

1986: Whitney Houston – Whitney Houston

1987: Slippery When Wet – Bon Jovi

1988: Faith – George Michael

1989: Don't Be Cruel – Bobby Brown

1990: Janet Jackson's Rhythm Nation 1814 – Janet Jackson

1991: Mariah Carey – Mariah Carey

1992: Ropin' the Wind – Garth Brooks

1993: The Bodyguard – Soundtrack

1994: The Sign – Ace of Base

1995: Cracked Rear View – Hootie & the Blowfish

1996: Jagged Little Pill – Alanis Morissette

1997: Spice – Spice Girls

1998: Titanic: Music from the Motion Picture – James Horner

1999: Millennium – Backstreet Boys

2000: No Strings Attached – NSYNC

2001–present 
2001: 1 – The Beatles

2002: The Eminem Show – Eminem

2003: Get Rich or Die Tryin' – 50 Cent

2004: Confessions – Usher

2005: The Massacre – 50 Cent

2006: Some Hearts – Carrie Underwood

2007: Daughtry – Daughtry

2008: As I Am – Alicia Keys

2009: Fearless – Taylor Swift

2010: I Dreamed a Dream – Susan Boyle

2011: 21 – Adele

2012: 21 – Adele

2013: The 20/20 Experience – Justin Timberlake

2014: Frozen – Soundtrack

2015: 1989 – Taylor Swift

2016: 25 – Adele

2017: Damn – Kendrick Lamar

2018: Reputation – Taylor Swift

2019: When We All Fall Asleep, Where Do We Go? – Billie Eilish

Authority control 
BIBSYS: 10006445

BNE: XX5177610

BNF: cb16020410t (data)

CANTIC: a11273884

GND: 137997698

ISNI: 0000 0000 7851 9858

LCCN: no2007053238

MusicBrainz: 20244d07-534f-4eff-b4d4-930878889970

NDL: 01238670

NKC: xx0095996

NLA: 57237488

NLI: 004970552

NTA: 320619443

SUDOC: 171403037

Trove: 1680377

VIAF: 88580701

 WorldCat Identities: lccn-no2007053238

Biography portal

Music portal

United States portal
