"This article is about the ballet to Stravinsky's 1910 music. For other uses of the word, see Firebird.

L'Oiseau de feu

The Firebird

Léon Bakst: Firebird, Ballerina, 1910

Choreographer Michel Fokine

Music Igor Stravinsky

Based on Russian folk tales

Premiere 25 June 1910

Palais Garnier

Original ballet company Ballets Russes

Characters The Firebird

Prince Ivan Tsarevich

Koschei, the Immortal

The Beautiful Tsarevna

Design Aleksandr Golovin (sets)

Léon Bakst (costumes)

Created for Tamara Karsavina, Michel Fokine

The Firebird (French: L'Oiseau de feu; Russian: Жар-птица, romanized: Zhar-ptitsa) is a ballet and orchestral concert work by the Russian-born composer Igor Stravinsky. It was written for the 1910 Paris season of Sergei Diaghilev's Ballets Russes company. The original choreography was by Michel Fokine, who collaborated with Alexandre Benois on a scenario based on the Russian fairy tales of the Firebird and the blessing and curse it possesses for its owner. Its premiere at the Opéra de Paris on 25 June 1910 was an immediate success, catapulting Stravinsky to international fame.

The ballet was not only Stravinsky's professional breakthrough, but also the beginning of his partnership with Diaghilev, which would subsequently produce Petrushka, The Rite of Spring, Pulcinella, Mavra, and Les noces.

Contents

1 History

1.1 Background

1.2 Creation

1.3 Reception

2 Subsequent ballet performances

3 Synopsis

4 Music

4.1 Instrumentation

5 Ballet suites

5.1 1911 Suite

5.2 1919 Suite

5.3 1945 Suite

6 In popular culture

7 First recordings

8 Notes

9 References

10 External links

History

Stravinsky, sketched by Picasso in 1920

Background

Igor Stravinsky was the son of Fyodor Stravinsky, the principal bass at the Imperial Mariinsky Theatre in Saint Petersburg, and Anna (née Kholodovskaya), a competent amateur singer and pianist from an old established Russian family. Fyodor's association with many of the leading figures in Russian music, including Rimsky-Korsakov, Borodin and Mussorgsky, meant that Igor grew up in an intensely musical home. In 1901, Stravinsky began to study law at Saint Petersburg Imperial University, while taking private lessons in harmony and counterpoint. Sensing talent in the young composer's early efforts, Rimsky-Korsakov took Stravinsky under his private tutelage. By the time of his mentor's death in 1908, Stravinsky had produced several works, among them a Piano Sonata in F-sharp minor, a Symphony in E-flat, and a short orchestral piece titled Feu d'artifice ("Fireworks").

In 1909, Stravinsky's Scherzo fantastique and Feu d'artifice were premiered in Saint Petersburg. Among those in the audience was the impresario Sergei Diaghilev, who was about to debut his Ballets Russes in Paris. Diaghilev's intention was to present new works in a distinctively 20th-century style, and he was looking for fresh compositional talent. Impressed by Stravinsky, he commissioned from him orchestrations of Chopin's music for the ballet Les Sylphides.

Creation

Alexandre Benois recalled that in 1908 he had suggested to Diaghilev the production of a Russian nationalist ballet, an idea all the more attractive given both the newly awakened French passion for Russian dance and the expensive costs of staging opera. The inspiration of mixing the mythical Firebird with the unrelated Russian tale of Koschei the Deathless possibly came from a popular child's verse by Yakov Polonsky, "A Winter's Journey" (Zimniy put, 1844), which includes the lines:

And in my dreams I see myself on a wolf's back

Riding along a forest path

To do battle with a sorcerer-tsar (Koschei)

In that land where a princess sits under lock and key,

Pining behind massive walls.

There gardens surround a palace all of glass;

There Firebirds sing by night

And peck at golden fruit.

Benois collaborated with the choreographer Michel Fokine, drawing from several books of Russian fairy tales including the collection of Alexander Afanasyev, to concoct a story involving the Firebird and the evil magician Koschei. The scenery was designed by Aleksandr Golovin and the costumes by Léon Bakst.

Diaghilev first approached the Russian composer Anatoly Lyadov in September 1909 to write the music. There is no evidence that he ever accepted the commission, despite the anecdotal story that he was slow to start composing the work. Nikolai Tcherepnin composed some music for the ballet (which he later used in his The Enchanted Kingdom), but withdrew from the project without explanation after completing only one scene. After deciding against using Alexander Glazunov and Nikolay Sokolov, Diaghilev finally chose the 28-year-old Stravinsky, who had already begun sketching out the music in anticipation of the commission.

Stravinsky would later remark about working with Fokine that it meant "nothing more than to say that we studied the libretto together, episode by episode, until I knew the exact measurements required of the music." Several ideas from works by Rimsky-Korsakov were used in The Firebird. Koschei's "Infernal Dance" borrows the highly chromatic scale Rimsky-Korsakov created for the character Chernobog in his opera Mlada, while the Khorovod uses the same folk tune from his Sinfonietta, Op. 31. The piano score was completed on 21 March 1910 and was fully orchestrated by May, although not before work was briefly interrupted by another Diaghilev commission: an orchestration of Grieg's Kobold, Op. 71, no. 3 for a charity ball dance featuring Vasily Nijinsky. 

Soon thereafter, Diaghilev began to organize private sneak previews of The Firebird for the press. French critic Robert Brussel, who attended one of these events, wrote in 1930:

The composer, young, slim, and uncommunicative, with vague meditative eyes, and lips set firm in an energetic looking face, was at the piano. But the moment he began to play, the modest and dimly lit dwelling glowed with a dazzling radiance. By the end of the first scene, I was conquered: by the last, I was lost in admiration. The manuscript on the music-rest, scored over with fine pencillings, revealed a masterpiece.

Reception

Tamara Karsavina as the Firebird and Michel Fokine as Prince Ivan in the 1910 Ballets Russes production of the ballet.

The Firebird was premiered by the Ballets Russes at the Palais Garnier in Paris on 25 June 1910, conducted by Gabriel Pierné. Even before the first performance, the company sensed a huge success in the making; and every performance of the ballet in that first production, as Tamara Karsavina recalled, met a "crescendo" of success. "Mark him well," Diaghilev said of Stravinsky, "he is a man on the eve of celebrity." 

Critics praised the ballet for its integration of decor, choreography and music. "The old-gold vermiculation of the fantastic back-cloth seems to have been invented to a formula identical with that of the shimmering web of the orchestra," wrote Henri Ghéon in Nouvelle revue française, who called the ballet "the most exquisite marvel of equilibrium" and added that Stravinsky was a "delicious musician." Michel-Dimitri Calvocoressi hailed the young composer as the legitimate heir to The Mighty Handful. The ballet’s success also secured Stravinsky's position as Diaghilev's star composer, and there were immediate talks of a sequel, leading to the composition of Petrushka and The Rite of Spring. In Russia, however, reaction was mixed. While Stravinsky's friend Andrey Rimsky-Korsakov spoke approvingly of it, the press mostly took a dim view of the music, with one critic denouncing what he considered its "horrifying poverty of melodic invention." A fellow Rimsky-Korsakov pupil, Jāzeps Vītols, wrote that "Stravinsky, it seems, has forgotten the concept of pleasure in sound. . .  dissonances unfortunately quickly become wearying, because there are no ideas hidden behind them."

Sergei Bertensson recalled Sergei Rachmaninoff saying of the music: "Great God! What a work of genius this is! This is true Russia!" Another colleague, Claude Debussy, who later became an admirer took a more sober view of the score: "What do you expect? One has to start somewhere." Richard Strauss told the composer in private conversation that he had made a "mistake" in beginning the piece pianissimo instead of astonishing the public with a "sudden crash." Shortly thereafter he summed up to the press his experience of hearing The Firebird for the first time by saying, "it's always interesting to hear one's imitators."

Subsequent ballet performances

Paul Petrov in the production by the Ballets Russes de Monte-Carlo in Sydney, 1936–1937

Main article: List of Firebird casts

The Firebird has been restaged by many choreographers, including George Balanchine and Jerome Robbins (co-choreographers), Graeme Murphy, Alexei Ratmansky, and Yuri Possokhov.

The ballet was revived in 1934 by Colonel Wassily de Basil's company, the Ballets Russes de Monte-Carlo, in a production staged in London, using the original decor and costumes from Diaghilev's company. The company subsequently performed the ballet in Australia, during the 1936–37 tour.

The work was staged by George Balanchine for the New York City Ballet in 1949 with Maria Tallchief as the Firebird, with scenery and costumes by Marc Chagall, and was kept in the repertory until 1965. The ballet was restaged by George Balanchine and Jerome Robbins in 1970 for the New York City Ballet with elaborated scenery by Chagall, and with new costumes by Karinska based on Chagall's for the 1972 Stravinsky Festival that introduced Gelsey Kirkland as the Firebird.

In 1970 Maurice Béjart staged his own version in which the ballet's protagonist was a young man who rose from the ranks of the revolutionists and became their leader. The lead role was danced by Michel Denard.

The Mariinsky Ballet performed the original choreography at Covent Garden in August 2011, as part of their Fokine retrospective.

The National Ballet of Canada created a version of the Firebird for television, occasionally rebroadcast, in which special effects were used to make it appear that the Firebird is in flight.

On 29 March 2012, the American Ballet Theatre premiered the ballet with choreography by Alexei Ratmansky at the Segerstrom Center for the Arts in Costa Mesa, California, starring Misty Copeland.

The Royal Ballet staged 6 performances of the ballet at the Royal Opera House in London in June 2019, with Yasmine Naghdi performing the role of the Firebird.

Synopsis

Drawing by Léon Bakst of Tsarevitch Ivan capturing the Firebird.

The ballet centers on the journey of its hero, Prince Ivan. While hunting in the forest, he strays into the magical realm of the evil Koschei the Immortal, whose immortality is preserved by keeping his soul in a magic egg hidden in a casket. Ivan chases and captures the Firebird and is about to kill her; she begs for her life, and he spares her. As a token of thanks, she offers him an enchanted feather that he can use to summon her should he be in dire need.

Prince Ivan then meets thirteen princesses who are under the spell of Koschei and falls in love with one of them. The next day, Ivan confronts the magician and eventually they begin quarrelling. When Koschei sends his minions after Ivan, he summons the Firebird. She intervenes, bewitching the monsters and making them dance an elaborate, energetic dance (the "Infernal Dance").

Exhausted, the creatures and Koschei then fall into a deep sleep. While they sleep, the Firebird directs Ivan to a tree stump where the casket with the egg containing Koschei's soul is hidden. Ivan destroys the egg, and with the spell broken and Koschei dead, the magical creatures that Koschei held captive are freed and the palace disappears. All of the "real" beings, including the princesses, awaken and with one final hint of the Firebird's music (though in Fokine's choreography she makes no appearance in that final scene on-stage), celebrate their victory.

Music

Most common numbers separation in recordings

Introduction

First Tableau

Le Jardin enchanté de Kachtcheï (The Enchanted Garden of Koschei)

Apparition de l'Oiseau de feu, poursuivi par Ivan Tsarévitch (Appearance of the Firebird, Pursued by Prince Ivan)

Danse de l'Oiseau de feu (Dance of the Firebird)

Capture de l'Oiseau de feu par Ivan Tsarévitch (Capture of the Firebird by Prince Ivan)

Supplications de l'Oiseau de feu (Supplication of the Firebird)

Apparition des treize princesses enchantées (Appearance of the Thirteen Enchanted Princesses)

Jeu des princesses avec les pommes d'or (The Princesses' Game with the Golden Apples). Scherzo

Brusque apparition d'Ivan Tsarévitch (Sudden Appearance of Prince Ivan)

Khorovode (Ronde) des princesses (Khorovod (Round Dance) of the Princesses)

Lever du jour (Daybreak)

Ivan Tsarévitch pénètre dans le palais de Kachtcheï (Prince Ivan Penetrates Koschei's Palace)

Carillon Féerique, apparition des monstres-gardiens de Kachtcheï et capture d'Ivan Tsarévitch (Magic Carillon, Appearance of Koschei's Monster Guardians, and Capture of Prince Ivan)

Arrivée de Kachtcheï l'Immortel (Arrival of Koschei the Immortal)

Dialogue de Kachtcheï avec Ivan Tsarévitch (Dialogue of Koschei and Prince Ivan)

Intercession des princesses (Intercession of the Princesses)

Apparition de l'Oiseau de feu (Appearance of the Firebird)

Danse de la suite de Kachtcheï, enchantée par l'Oiseau de feu (Dance of Koschei' Retinue, Enchanted by the Firebird)

Danse infernale de tous les sujets de Kachtcheï (Infernal Dance of All Koschei's Subjects)

Berceuse (L'Oiseau de feu) (Lullaby)

Réveil de Kachtcheï (Koschei's Awakening)

Mort de Kachtcheï (Koschei's Death)

Profondes ténèbres (Profound Darkness)

Second Tableau

Disparition du palais et des sortilèges de Kachtcheï, animation des chevaliers pétrifiés, allégresse générale (Disappearance of Koschei's Palace and Magical Creations, Return to Life of the Petrified Knights, General Rejoicing)

Numbers separated by Stravinsky himself

Introduction

First Tableau

Le Jardin enchanté de Kachtcheï (The Enchanted Garden of Koschei)

Apparition de l'Oiseau de feu, poursuivi par Ivan Tsarévitch (Appearance of the Firebird, Pursued by Prince Ivan)

Danse de l'Oiseau de feu (Dance of the Firebird)

Capture de l'Oiseau de feu par Ivan Tsarévitch (Capture of the Firebird by Prince Ivan)

Supplications de l'Oiseau de feu (Supplication of the Firebird) – Apparition des treize princesses enchantées (Appearance of the Thirteen Enchanted Princesses)

Jeu des princesses avec les pommes d'or (The Princesses' Game with the Golden Apples). Scherzo

Brusque apparition d'Ivan Tsarévitch (Sudden Appearance of Prince Ivan)

Khorovode (Ronde) des princesses (Khorovod (Round Dance) of the Princesses)

Lever du jour (Daybreak) – Ivan Tsarévitch pénètre dans le palais de Kachtcheï (Prince Ivan Penetrates Koschei's Palace)

Carillon Féerique, apparition des monstres-gardiens de Kachtcheï et capture d'Ivan Tsarévitch (Magic Carillon, Appearance of Koschei's Monster Guardians, and Capture of Prince Ivan) – Arrivée de Kachtcheï l'Immortel (Arrival of Koschei the Immortal) – Dialogue de Kachtcheï avec Ivan Tsarévitch (Dialogue of Koschei and Prince Ivan) – Intercession des princesses (Intercession of the Princesses) – Apparition de l'Oiseau de feu (Appearance of the Firebird)

Danse de la suite de Kachtcheï, enchantée par l'Oiseau de feu (Dance of Koschei' Retinue, Enchanted by the Firebird)

Danse infernale de tous les sujets de Kachtcheï (Infernal Dance of All Koschei's Subjects) – Berceuse (L'Oiseau de feu) (Lullaby) – Réveil de Kachtcheï (Koschei's Awakening) – Mort de Kachtcheï (Koschei's Death) – Profondes ténèbres (Profound Darkness)

Second Tableau

Disparition du palais et des sortilèges de Kachtcheï, animation des chevaliers pétrifiés, allégresse générale (Disappearance of Koschei's Palace and Magical Creations, Return to Life of the Petrified Knights, General Rejoicing)

Instrumentation

The work is scored for a large orchestra with the following instrumentation:

Woodwinds

2 piccolos (2nd doubles 3rd flute)

2 flutes

3 oboes

English horn

3 clarinets in A (3rd doubles Clarinet in D)

bass clarinet in B♭

3 bassoons (3rd doubles 2nd contrabassoon)

contrabassoon

Brass

4 horns in F

3 trumpets in A

3 trombones

tuba

3 onstage trumpets

2 onstage tenor Wagner tubas

2 onstage bass Wagner tubas

Percussion

bass drum

cymbals

triangle

tambourine

tamtam

glockenspiel

xylophone

piano

celesta

3 harps

timpani

Strings

first violins

second violins

violas

cellos

double basses

Ballet suites

Ivan Bilibin. A warrior — costume design for 1931 performance of The Firebird

Besides the complete 50-minute ballet score of 1909–10, Stravinsky arranged three suites for concert performance which date from 1911, 1919, and 1945.

1911 Suite

Introduction – Kashchei's Enchanted Garden – Dance of the Firebird

Supplication of the Firebird

The Princesses’ Game with Apples

The Princesses’ Khorovod (Rondo, round dance)

Infernal Dance of all Kashchei's Subjects

Instrumentation: essentially as per the original ballet. The score was printed from the same plates, with only the new endings for the movements being newly engraved.

1919 Suite

Introduction – The Firebird and its dance – The Firebird's variation

The Princesses’ Khorovod (Rondo, round dance)

Infernal dance of King Kashchei

Berceuse (Lullaby)

Finale

Instrumentation: 2 flutes (2nd also piccolo); 2 oboes (2nd also English horn for one measure); 2 clarinets; 2 bassoons; 4 horns; 2 trumpets; 3 trombones; tuba; timpani; bass drum; cymbals; triangle; xylophone; harp; piano (also opt. celesta); strings.

This suite was created in Switzerland for conductor Ernest Ansermet. When it was originally published, the score contained many mistakes, which were only fixed in 1985.

1945 Suite

Introduction – The Firebird and its dance – The Firebird's variation

Pantomime I

Pas de deux: Firebird and Ivan Tsarevich

Pantomime II

Scherzo: Dance of the Princesses

Pantomime III

The Princesses' Khorovod (Rondo, round dance)

Infernal dance of King Kashchei

Berceuse (Lullaby)

Finale

Instrumentation: 2 Flutes (2nd also Piccolo); 2 Oboes; 2 Clarinets; 2 Bassoons; 4 Horns; 2 Trumpets; 3 Trombones; Tuba; Timpani; Bass Drum; Snare Drum; Tambourine; Cymbals; Triangle; Xylophone; Harp; Piano; Strings.

In 1945, shortly before he acquired American citizenship, Stravinsky was contacted by Leeds Music with a proposal to revise the orchestration of his first three ballets in order to recopyright them in the United States. The composer agreed, setting aside work on the finale of his Symphony in Three Movements. He proceeded to fashion a new suite based on the 1919 version, adding to it and reorchestrating several minutes of the pantomines from the original score.

In popular culture

Reconstruction of the world premiere choreography and design at the Salzburger Pfingstfestspiele 2013. Ballet of the Mariinsky Theatre, Saint Petersburg.

Excerpts from The Firebird were used in Bruno Bozzetto's animated film Allegro Non Troppo and in Fantasia 2000.

Saviour Pirotta and Catherine Hyde's picture book, Firebird, is based on the original stories that inspired the ballet, and was published in 2010 to celebrate the ballet's centenary.

The influence of The Firebird has been felt beyond classical music. Stravinsky was an important influence on Frank Zappa, who used the melody from the Berceuse in his 1967 album Absolutely Free, in the Amnesia Vivace section of the "Duke of Prunes" suite (along with a melody from The Rite of Spring). Prog rock band Yes has regularly used the ballet's Finale as their "walk-on" music for concerts since 1971. During the 1980s and 1990s, the chord which opens the Infernal Dance became a widely used orchestra hit sample in music, specifically within new jack swing.

It was used in the opening ceremony of Sochi 2014 during the Cauldron Lighting segment.

First recordings

Release year
Orchestra
Conductor
Record Company
Format
Notes

1916
 Beecham Symphony Orchestra
 Sir Thomas Beecham
 Columbia Gramophone Company
 78 RPM
 Three excerpts from 1911 suite. First ever commercial recording of Stravinsky's music.

1924
 London Symphony Orchestra
 Albert Coates
 His Master's Voice
 78 RPM
 Premiere recording of the complete 1911 suite.

1924
 Philadelphia Orchestra
 Leopold Stokowski
 Victor
 78 RPM
 Premiere acoustic recording of the complete 1919 suite.

1925
 Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra
 Oskar Fried
 Polydor
 78 RPM
 Premiere electrical recording of the complete 1919 suite.

1947
 New York Philharmonic-Symphony
 Igor Stravinsky
 Columbia Records
 78 RPM/LP
 Premiere recording of the complete 1945 suite.

1960
 London Symphony Orchestra
 Antal Doráti
 Mercury Records
 LP
 Premiere recording of the complete 1911 original score.

Notes

Citation notes

^ Walsh, Stephen (2012). "Stravinsky, Igor, §1: Background and early years, 1882–1905". Grove Music Online. Retrieved 9 August 2012.(subscription required)

^ Walsh, Stephen (2012). "Stravinsky, Igor, §2: Towards The Firebird, 1902–09". Grove Music Online. Retrieved 9 August 2012. (subscription required)

^ "Stravinsky, Igor, §11: Posthumous reputation and legacy: Works". Grove Music Online. 2012. Retrieved 9 August 2012. (subscription required)

^ White 1961, pp. 52–53

^ Griffiths, Paul (2012). "Diaghilev , Sergey Pavlovich". Grove Music Online. Retrieved 9 August 2012. (subscription required)

^ Walsh, Stephen (1999). Stravinsky: A Creative Spring (Russia and France, 1882 - 1934). New York City: Alfred A. Knopf. p. 122. ISBN 0-679-41484-3.

^ Benois' 1910 article: "Two years ago I gave voice … to the dream that a true 'Russian (or perhaps Slavonic) mythology' would make its appearance in ballet"; quoted in Taruskin 1996, p. 555

^ Taruskin 1996, pp. 556–557.

^ Taruskin 1996, pp. 576–577.

^ Taruskin 1996, pp. 577–578.

^ Taruskin 1996, pp. 574–575.

^ a b Taruskin 1996, pp. 579.

^ Stravinsky, Igor; Craft, Robert (1962), Expositions and Developments. New York City: Doubleday; page 128

^ Walsh 1 1999, p. 137 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFWalsh_11999 (help)

^ Walsh 1 1999, p. 138 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFWalsh_11999 (help)

^ Stephen Walsh: 'Stravinsky, Igor', Grove Music Online ed. L. Macy (Retrieved 1 April 2008)

^ a b Taruskin 1996, p. 638.

^ White, Eric Walter. "The Man," Stravinsky the Composer and his Works (University of California Press, 1969), p. 18.

^ Walsh 1 1999, p. 143 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFWalsh_11999 (help)

^ Taruskin 1996, p. 639.

^ Taruskin 1996, p. 662.

^ Walsh 1 1999, p. 150 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFWalsh_11999 (help)

^ Walsh 1 1999, p. 151 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFWalsh_11999 (help)

^ Slonimsky 2014, p. 197.

^ Walsh 1 1999, p. 136 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFWalsh_11999 (help)

^ Walsh 1 1999, p. 188 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFWalsh_11999 (help)

^ Sorley Walker 1982, p. 41.

^ "Ballets Russes | What's On". National Library of Australia. Retrieved 5 April 2011.

^ The 1970 restaging uses only the 1945 suite as accompaniment, as indicated by a program note whenever the work is performed.

^ Pitou, Spire (1990). The Paris Opera: An Encyclopedia of Operas, Ballets, Composers, and Performers; Growth and Grandeur, 1815-1914; M-Z. Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-27783-2.

^ "Mariinsky in London Roundup". The Ballet Bag. 26 August 2011. Retrieved 18 June 2019.

^ "The Firebird triple bill, Royal Ballet review – generous programme with Russian flavour". theartsdesk.com. Retrieved 18 June 2019.

^ "A gorgeous triple bill to end The Royal Ballet's season". bachtrack.com. Retrieved 18 June 2019.

^ Stravinsky, I. (1910). L'Oiseaux de Feu (conte dansé en 2 tableaux) . Moscow: P. Jurgenson, 1911. Print.

^ Johnston, Blair. "L'oiseau de feu (The Firebird), concert suite for orchestra No. 1". AllMusic. Retrieved 27 November 2018.

^ a b Kramer, Jonathan D. "Stravinksy's Firebird". cincinnatisymphony.org. Retrieved 27 November 2018.

^ IMSLP.

^ Dettmer, Roger. "L'oiseau de feu (The Firebird), concert suite for orchestra No. 2". AllMusic. Retrieved 27 November 2018.

^ Walsh, Stephen (2006), Stravinsky: The Second Exile (France and America, 1934 - 1971). New York City: Alfred A. Knopf; pages 173-175

^ Chris Hicks (12 March 1991). "Allegro Non Troppo". Deseret News. Retrieved 5 December 2011.

^ "FIREBIRD". Catherine Hyde Home. Archived from the original on 26 August 2014. Retrieved 22 August 2014.

^ Zappa, Frank (1989). The real Frank Zappa book. United States: Simon & Schuster. p. 167. ISBN 0-671-63870-X.

^ Ulrich, Charles (2018). The Big Note. Canada: Star Books. p. 3. ISBN 9781554201464.

^ "The fascinating history of the "orchestra hit" in music". kottke.org.

^ "The XXII Olympic Winter Games in Sochi in 2014 has opened with a grand show thrilling spectators". Sochi Organizing Committee. 8 February 2014. Archived from the original on 8 February 2014.

References

Slonimsky, Nicholas (2014). Slonimsky's Book of Musical Anecdotes. Hoboken: Taylor and Francis. ISBN 978-1-135-36860-9.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Sorley Walker, Kathrine (1982). De Basil's Ballets Russes. London: Hutchinson. ISBN 0-09-147510-4.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link) (New York, Atheneum. ISBN 0-689-11365-X)

Taruskin, Richard (1996). Stravinsky and the Russian Traditions. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-816250-2.CS1 maint: ref=harv (link)

Walsh, Stephen (1999). Stravinsky: A Creative Spring (Russia and France, 1882 - 1934). New York City: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 0-679-41484-3.

Walsh, Stephen (2006). Stravinsky: The Second Exile (France and America, 1934 - 1971). New York City: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 0-375-40752-9.

The Firebird: Scores at the International Music Score Library Project (IMSLP)

External links

 Wikimedia Commons has media related to The Firebird.

Balanchine Foundation website

Balanchine Trust website

The Australian Ballet website

NYCB website

Robbins Foundation and Trust website

National Library of Australia Ballets Russes website

v

t

e

Igor Stravinsky

Operas and

musical dramas 
The Flood

L'Histoire du soldat

Mavra

The Nightingale

Oedipus rex

Perséphone

The Rake's Progress

Renard

Ballets 
Agon

Apollo

Le baiser de la fée

The Firebird

Jeu de cartes

Les noces

Petrushka

Pulcinella

Orpheus

The Rite of Spring (discography)

Scènes de ballet

Symphonies and

concertos 
Capriccio for Piano and Orchestra

Concerto for Piano and Wind Instruments

Concerto in D

Concerto in E♭ ("Dumbarton Oaks")

Ebony Concerto

Symphonies of Wind Instruments

Symphony in C

Symphony in E♭ major

Symphony in Three Movements

Violin Concerto in D

Choral 
Ave Maria

Babel

Cantata

Canticum Sacrum

Mass

Requiem Canticles

Le roi des étoiles

A Sermon, a Narrative and a Prayer

Symphony of Psalms

Threni

Piano and

pianola 
Les cinq doigts

Concerto for Two Pianos

Étude pour pianola

Five Easy Pieces

Piano-Rag-Music

Piano Sonata

Piano Sonata in F♯ minor

Quatre études, Op. 7

Scherzo

Serenade in A

Sonata for Two Pianos

Tango

Three Easy Pieces

Trois mouvements de Petrouchka

Valse des fleurs

Arrangements 
Bluebird Pas de Deux (from Tchaikovsky's The Sleeping Beauty)

Other 
Abraham and Isaac

Berceuses du chat

Le chant du rossignol

Circus Polka

Danses concertantes

Double Canon (in Memoriam Raoul Dufy)

Duo Concertant

Élégie

Elegy for J.F.K.

Epitaphium

Fanfare for a New Theatre

Feu d'artifice

Funeral Song

Lied ohne Name

Monumentum pro Gesualdo

Movements for Piano and Orchestra

Octet

Ode

Pastorale

Pribaoutki

Quatre études

Scherzo à la russe

Scherzo fantastique

Septet

Three Pieces for Solo Clarinet

Three Pieces for String Quartet

Variations

Canon on a Russian Popular Tune

Related articles 
George Balanchine

Ballets Russes

Coco Chanel & Igor Stravinsky (film)

Compositions

Danses concertantes

Vera de Bosset

Sergei Diaghilev

Discography

Neoclassicism

Petrushka chord

Psalms chord

Werner Reinhart

Serialism

Stravinsky Fountain

Fyodor Stravinsky

Soulima Stravinsky

 List of compositions by Igor Stravinsky

 Book:Igor Stravinsky

 Category:Igor Stravinsky

v

t

e

Ballets by George Balanchine

A la Françaix

A Midsummer Night's Dream

Agon

Allegro Brillante

Apollo

Le baiser de la fée

Le Bal

Ballade

Ballo della Regina

Bayou

Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme

Bourrée fantasque

Brahms–Schoenberg Quartet

Bugaku

Chaconne

Le chant du rossignol

Circus Polka

Clarinade

Concertino

Concerto Barocco

Coppélia

Cortège Hongrois

Divertimento Brillante

Divertimento from “Le Baiser De La Fée”

Divertimento No. 15

Don Quixote

Donizetti Variations

Duo Concertant

Élégie

L'enfant et les sortilèges

Episodes

Etude for Piano

The Firebird

The Four Temperaments

Garland Dance

Gounod Symphony

Haieff Divertimento

Harlequinade

Hungarian Gypsy Airs

Ivesiana

Jeu de cartes

Jewels

Kammermusik No. 2

Liebeslieder Walzer

Meditation

Metamorphoses

Metastaseis and Pithoprakta

Monumentum pro Gesualdo

Movements for Piano and Orchestra

Mozartiana

Noah and the Flood

The Nutcracker

Orpheus

Pas de Dix

Pas de Trois (Glinka)

Pas de Trois (Minkus)

Pavane

The Prodigal Son

Pulcinella

Ragtime I

Ragtime II

Raymonda Variations

Requiem Canticles

Robert Schumann’s Davidsbündlertänze

Scherzo à la russe

Scotch Symphony

Serenade

The Seven Deadly Sins

Slaughter on Tenth Avenue

La Sonnambula

Sonatine

La source

Square Dance

Stars and Stripes

The Steadfast Tin Soldier

Stravinsky Violin Concerto

Swan Lake

Sylvia Pas de Deux

Symphonie Concertante

Symphony in C

Symphony in Three Movements

Tango

Tarantella

Theme and Variations

Le tombeau de Couperin

Tschaikovsky Pas de Deux

Tschaikovsky Piano Concerto No. 2

Tschaikovsky Suite No. 3

Tzigane

Union Jack

La valse

Valse-Fantaisie

Variations

Variations for Orchestra

Variations Pour une Porte et un Soupir

Vienna Waltzes

Walpurgisnacht Ballet

Western Symphony

Who Cares?

Zenobia

List of ballets by George Balanchine

v

t

e

Jerome Robbins

Ballets 
2 and 3 Part Inventions

Afternoon of a Faun

Andantino

Antique Epigraphs

Brahms/Handel

Brandenburg

The Cage

Circus Polka

The Concert

Dances at a Gathering

Dybbuk

Fancy Free

Fanfare

The Firebird

Four Bagatelles

The Four Seasons

Gershwin Piano Concerto

Glass Pieces

The Goldberg Variations

I'm Old Fashioned

In G Major

In Memory Of ...

In the Night

Interplay

Ives, Songs

Mother Goose

Moves

Les Noces

NY Export: Opus Jazz

Opus 19/The Dreamer

Other Dances

Piano Pieces

Requiem Canticles

Suite of Dances

A Suite of Dances

Tricolore

Watermill

West Side Story Suite

Musicals 
Peter Pan (1954)

Films 
On the Town (1949), "based on an idea by Jerome Robbins"

West Side Story (1961)

v

t

e

Modernism

Milestones 
Le Déjeuner sur l’herbe (1862–1863)

Olympia (1863)

A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte (1886)

Mont Sainte-Victoir (1887)

The Starry Night (1889)

Ubu Roi (1896)

Verklärte Nacht (1899)

Le bonheur de vivre (1905–1906)

Les Demoiselles d'Avignon (1907)

The Dance (1909–1910)

The Firebird (1910)

Afternoon of a Faun (1912)

Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2 (1912)

The Rite of Spring (1913)

In Search of Lost Time (1913–1927)

The Metamorphosis (1915)

Black Square (1915)

Fountain (1917)

The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari (1920)

Six Characters in Search of an Author (1921)

Ulysses (1922)

The Waste Land (1922)

The Magic Mountain (1924)

Battleship Potemkin (1925)

The Sun Also Rises (1926)

The Threepenny Opera (1928)

The Sound and the Fury (1929)

Un Chien Andalou (1929)

Villa Savoye (1931)

The Blue Lotus (1936)

Fallingwater (1936)

Waiting for Godot (1953)

Literature 
Guillaume Apollinaire

Djuna Barnes

Tadeusz Borowski

André Breton

Mikhail Bulgakov

Anton Chekhov

Joseph Conrad

Alfred Döblin

E. M. Forster

William Faulkner

Gustave Flaubert

Ford Madox Ford

André Gide

Knut Hamsun

Jaroslav Hašek

Ernest Hemingway

Hermann Hesse

James Joyce

Franz Kafka

Arthur Koestler

D. H. Lawrence

Wyndham Lewis

Thomas Mann

Katherine Mansfield

Filippo Tommaso Marinetti

Guy de Maupassant

Robert Musil

Katherine Anne Porter

Marcel Proust

Gertrude Stein

Italo Svevo

Virginia Woolf

Poetry 
Anna Akhmatova

Richard Aldington

W. H. Auden

Charles Baudelaire

Luca Caragiale

Constantine P. Cavafy

Blaise Cendrars

Hart Crane

H.D.

Robert Desnos

T. S. Eliot

Paul Éluard

Odysseas Elytis

F. S. Flint

Stefan George

Max Jacob

Federico García Lorca

Amy Lowell

Robert Lowell

Mina Loy

Stéphane Mallarmé

Marianne Moore

Wilfred Owen

Octavio Paz

Fernando Pessoa

Ezra Pound

Lionel Richard

Rainer Maria Rilke

Arthur Rimbaud

Giorgos Seferis

Wallace Stevens

Dylan Thomas

Tristan Tzara

Paul Valéry

William Carlos Williams

W. B. Yeats

Visual art 
Josef Albers

Jean Arp

Balthus

George Bellows

Umberto Boccioni

Pierre Bonnard

Georges Braque

Constantin Brâncuși

Alexander Calder

Mary Cassatt

Paul Cézanne

Marc Chagall

Giorgio de Chirico

Camille Claudel

Joseph Cornell

Joseph Csaky

Salvador Dalí

Edgar Degas

Raoul Dufy

Willem de Kooning

Robert Delaunay

Charles Demuth

Otto Dix

Theo van Doesburg

Marcel Duchamp

James Ensor

Max Ernst

Jacob Epstein

Paul Gauguin

Alberto Giacometti

Vincent van Gogh

Natalia Goncharova

Julio González

Juan Gris

George Grosz

Raoul Hausmann

Jacques Hérold

Hannah Höch

Edward Hopper

Frida Kahlo

Wassily Kandinsky

Ernst Ludwig Kirchner

Paul Klee

Oskar Kokoschka

Pyotr Konchalovsky

André Lhote

Fernand Léger

Franz Marc

Albert Marque

Jean Marchand

René Magritte

Kazimir Malevich

Édouard Manet

Henri Matisse

Colin McCahon

Jean Metzinger

Joan Miró

Amedeo Modigliani

Piet Mondrian

Claude Monet

Henry Moore

Edvard Munch

Emil Nolde

Georgia O'Keeffe

Méret Oppenheim

Francis Picabia

Pablo Picasso

Camille Pissarro

Man Ray

Odilon Redon

Pierre-Auguste Renoir

Auguste Rodin

Henri Rousseau

Egon Schiele

Georges Seurat

Paul Signac

Alfred Sisley

Edward Steichen

Alfred Stieglitz

Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec

Édouard Vuillard

Grant Wood

Lin Fengmian

Music 
George Antheil

Milton Babbitt

Jean Barraqué

Béla Bartók

Alban Berg

Luciano Berio

Nadia Boulanger

Pierre Boulez

John Cage

Elliott Carter

Aaron Copland

Heitor Villa-Lobos

Henry Cowell

Henri Dutilleux

Morton Feldman

Henryk Górecki

Josef Matthias Hauer

Paul Hindemith

Arthur Honegger

Charles Ives

Leoš Janáček

György Ligeti

Witold Lutosławski

Olivier Messiaen

Luigi Nono

Harry Partch

Krzysztof Penderecki

Sergei Prokofiev

Luigi Russolo

Erik Satie

Pierre Schaeffer

Arnold Schoenberg

Dmitri Shostakovich

Richard Strauss

Igor Stravinsky

Karol Szymanowski

Edgard Varèse

Anton Webern

Kurt Weill

Iannis Xenakis

Theatre 
Edward Albee

Maxwell Anderson

Jean Anouilh

Antonin Artaud

Samuel Beckett

Bertolt Brecht

Anton Chekhov

Friedrich Dürrenmatt

Jean Genet

Maxim Gorky

Walter Hasenclever

Henrik Ibsen

William Inge

Eugène Ionesco

Alfred Jarry

Georg Kaiser

Maurice Maeterlinck

Vladimir Mayakovsky

Arthur Miller

Seán O'Casey

Eugene O'Neill

John Osborne

Luigi Pirandello

Erwin Piscator

George Bernard Shaw

August Strindberg

John Millington Synge

Ernst Toller

Frank Wedekind

Thornton Wilder

Stanisław Ignacy Witkiewicz

Film 
Robert Aldrich

Michelangelo Antonioni

Ingmar Bergman

Anton Giulio Bragaglia

Robert Bresson

Luis Buñuel

Marcel Carné

Charlie Chaplin

René Clair

Jean Cocteau

Maya Deren

Alexander Dovzhenko

Carl Theodor Dreyer

Viking Eggeling

Sergei Eisenstein

Jean Epstein

Federico Fellini

Robert J. Flaherty

Sam Fuller

Abel Gance

Isidore Isou

Buster Keaton

Lev Kuleshov

Fritz Lang

Ida Lupino

Marcel L'Herbier

Georges Méliès

F. W. Murnau

Georg Wilhelm Pabst

Vsevolod Pudovkin

Nicholas Ray

Jean Renoir

Walter Ruttmann

Victor Sjöström

Josef von Sternberg

Dziga Vertov

Jean Vigo

Orson Welles

Robert Wiene

Dance 
George Balanchine

Merce Cunningham

Clotilde von Derp

Sergei Diaghilev

Isadora Duncan

Michel Fokine

Loie Fuller

Martha Graham

Hanya Holm

Doris Humphrey

Léonide Massine

Vaslav Nijinsky

Alwin Nikolais

Alexander Sakharoff

Ted Shawn

Anna Sokolow

Ruth St. Denis

Helen Tamiris

Charles Weidman

Mary Wigman

Architecture 
Marcel Breuer

Gordon Bunshaft

Jack Allen Charney

Walter Gropius

Hector Guimard

Raymond Hood

Victor Horta

Friedensreich Hundertwasser

Philip Johnson

Louis Kahn

Le Corbusier

Adolf Loos

Konstantin Melnikov

Erich Mendelsohn

Pier Luigi Nervi

Richard Neutra

Oscar Niemeyer

Hans Poelzig

Antonin Raymond

Gerrit Rietveld

Eero Saarinen

Rudolf Steiner

Edward Durell Stone

Louis Sullivan

Vladimir Tatlin

Paul Troost

Ludwig Mies van der Rohe

Frank Lloyd Wright

Related 
American modernism

Armory Show

Art Deco

Art Nouveau

Ashcan School

Avant-garde

Ballets Russes

Bauhaus

Buddhist modernism

Constructivism

Cubism

Dada

Degenerate art

De Stijl

Der Blaue Reiter

Die Brücke

Ecomodernism

Expressionism

Expressionist music

Fauvism

Fourth dimension in art

Fourth dimension in literature

Futurism

Grosvenor School of Modern Art

Hanshinkan Modernism

High modernism

Imagism

Impressionism

Incoherents

International Style

Late modernism

Late modernity

Lettrism

List of art movements

List of avant-garde artists

List of modernist poets

Lyrical abstraction

Maximalism

Minimalism

Modern art

Modernity

Neo-Dada

Neo-primitivism

New Objectivity

Orphism

Post-Impressionism

Postminimalism

Postmodernism

Postmodernist film

Reactionary modernism

Metamodernism

Remodernism

Romanticism

Second Viennese School

Structural film

Surrealism

Symbolism

Synchromism

Tonalism

Warsaw Autumn

v

t

e

Fantasia

Fantasia (1940)

Fantasia 2000 (1999)

Conductors 
Leopold Stokowski (Fantasia)

Irwin Kostal (1982 digital re-recording)

James Levine (Fantasia 2000)

Segments

Fantasia 
Toccata and Fugue in D minor

The Nutcracker Suite

The Sorcerer's Apprentice

The Rite of Spring

Symphony No. 6 (Beethoven)

Dance of the Hours

Night on Bald Mountain/Ave Maria

Fantasia 2000 
Symphony No. 5 (Beethoven)

Pines of Rome

Rhapsody in Blue

Piano Concerto No. 2 (Shostakovich)

The Carnival of the Animals

The Sorcerer's Apprentice

Pomp and Circumstance Marches

The Firebird Suite

Characters 
Mickey Mouse

Donald Duck

Daisy Duck

Chernabog

Yen Sid

Video games 
Fantasia (1991)

Disney Magical World (2013)

Disney Infinity (2013)

Fantasia: Music Evolved (2014)

Related 
A Corny Concerto (1943)

Gumbasia (1955)

Allegro Non Troppo (1977)

Destino (2003)

Lorenzo (2004)

One by One (2004)

The Little Matchgirl (2006)

Fantasia Gardens

Fantasmic!

Fantasound

The Sorcerer's Apprentice (2010)

Sorcerer's Hat

Disney Fantasia: Live in Concert

Kingdom Hearts

Epic Mickey

Once Upon a Time

Ten Pieces

The Nutcracker and the Four Realms (2018)

Deems Taylor

See also: Category

Authority control 
BNF: cb13919969z (data)

GND: 30015805X

MusicBrainz work: d2a1f57e-f7c9-4098-a716-f5c72815e0ab
