"Ur III dynasty

Ur III dynasty

c. 2112 BC – c. 2004 BC

Map showing the Ur III state and its sphere of influence.

Capital Ur

Common languages Sumerian language

Religion

Sumerian religion

Government Monarchy

Ensí

• c. 2112–2095 BC (MC)

Ur-Nammu (first)

• c. 2028–2004 BC (MC)

Ibbi-Sin (last)

Historical era Bronze Age

• Established

c. 2112 BC (MC)

• Lament for Ur

c. 2004 BC (MC)

• Disestablished

c. 2004 BC (MC)

Preceded by Succeeded by

 Gutian dynasty of Sumer

 Isin-Larsa period
 
Today part of 
Iraq

Syria

Lebanon

Iran

The Third Dynasty of Ur, also called the Neo-Sumerian Empire, refers to a 22nd to 21st century BC (middle chronology) Sumerian ruling dynasty based in the city of Ur and a short-lived territorial-political state which some historians consider to have been a nascent empire.

The Third Dynasty of Ur is commonly abbreviated as Ur III by historians studying the period. It is numbered in reference to previous dynasties, such as the First Dynasty of Ur (26-25th century BCE), but it seems the once supposed Second Dynasty of Ur never existed.

The Third Dynasty of Ur was the last Sumerian dynasty which came to preeminent power in Mesopotamia. It began after several centuries of control by Akkadian and Gutian kings. It controlled the cities of Isin, Larsa, and Eshnunna and extended as far north as Upper Mesopotamia. The dynasty corresponded to a Sumerian renaissance following the fall of the First Dynasty of Ur.

Contents

1 History

1.1 The military and conquests of Ur III

1.1.1 Conflicts with northeastern mountain tribes

1.1.2 Military rulers of Mari

1.2 Timeline of rulers

1.2.1 Abraham

1.3 Fall of Ur III

2 Dating systems

3 Social and political organization

3.1 Political organization

3.2 The city of Nippur and its importance

3.3 Social system

3.4 An early code of law

4 Industry and commerce

4.1 Trade With the Gulf Region

4.2 Commercial relations with the Indus

5 Art and culture

5.1 Literature

6 See also

7 Further reading

8 External links

9 References

History

Further information: History of Mesopotamia

The Third Dynasty of Ur arose some time after the fall of the Akkad Dynasty. The period between the last powerful king of the Akkad Dynasty, Shar-Kali-Sharri, and the first king of Ur III, Ur-Nammu, is not well documented, but most Assyriologists posit that there was a brief "dark age", followed by a power struggle among the most powerful city-states. On the king-lists, Shar-Kali-Shari is followed by two more kings of Akkad and six in Uruk; however, there are no year names surviving for any of these, nor even any artifacts confirming that any of these reigns was historical — save one artifact for Dudu of Akkad (Shar-Kali-Sharri's immediate successor on the list). Akkad's primacy, instead, seems to have been usurped by Gutian invaders from the Zagros, whose kings ruled in Mesopotamia for an indeterminate period (124 years according to some copies of the kinglist, only 25 according to others.) An illiterate and nomadic people, their rule was not conducive to agriculture, nor record-keeping, and by the time they were expelled, the region was crippled by severe famine and skyrocketing grain prices. Their last king, Tirigan, was driven out by Utu-hengal of Uruk, beginning the "Sumerian Renaissance".

Utu-hengal, Prince of the Summerian city of Uruk, praying for victory against the Gutian king Tirigan. 19th century illustration.

Empire of the Third Dynasty of Ur (in green), with territory, zone of influence, and colonial outposts, at their greatest. West is at top, North at right.

Following Utu-Hengal's reign, Ur-Nammu (originally a general) founded the Third Dynasty of Ur, but the precise events surrounding his rise are unclear. The Sumerian King List tells us that Utu-hengal had reigned for seven years (or 426, or 26 in other copies), although only one year-name for him is known from records, that of his accession, suggesting a shorter reign.

It is possible that Ur-Nammu was originally his governor. There are two stelae discovered in Ur that include this detail in an inscription about Ur-Nammu's life.

Ur-Nammu rose to prominence as a warrior-king when he crushed the ruler of Lagash in battle, killing the king himself. After this battle, Ur-Nammu seems to have earned the title 'king of Sumer and Agade.'

Ur's dominance over the Neo-Sumerian Empire was consolidated with the famous Code of Ur-Nammu, probably the first such law-code for Mesopotamia since that of Urukagina of Lagash centuries earlier.

Many significant changes occurred in the empire under Shulgi's reign. He took steps to centralize and standardize the procedures of the empire. He is credited with standardizing administrative processes, archival documentation, the tax system, and the national calendar. He captured the city of Susa and the surrounding region, toppling Elamite king Kutik-Inshushinak, while the rest of Elam fell under control of Shimashki dynasty.

The military and conquests of Ur III

Iddin-Sin, King of the Simurrum. The Simurrum, a mountain tribe, were vanquished by the armies of the Third Dynasty of Ur, circa 2000 BC (detail)

In the last century of the 3rd millennium BC, it is believed that the kings of Ur waged several conflicts around the frontiers of the kingdom. These conflicts are believed to have been influenced by the king of Akkad. As we have little evidence of how the kings organized their forces, it is unclear whether defensive forces were in the center or outside the kingdom. One of the things we do know is that one of the rulers who was the second ruler of the dynasty, Šulgi achieved some expansion and conquest. These were continued by his three successors but their conquests are less frequent with time.

At the very height of the expansion of Ur, they had taken territory from southeastern Anatolia (modern Turkey) to the Iranian shore of the Persian Gulf, a testimony to the strength of the dynasty. The armies of Ur did bring back precious booty when they conquered a place. There are hundreds of texts that explain how treasures were seized by the Ur III armies and brought back to the kingdom after many victories. Also in some texts it appears that the Shulgi campaigns were the most profitable for the kingdom. It is most likely the main people who benefited from the spoils were the kings and temples that were back in the main parts of the kingdom.

Conflicts with northeastern mountain tribes

The rulers of Ur III were often in conflict with the highland tribes of the Zagros mountain area who dwelled in the northeastern portion of Mesopotamian area. The most important of these tribes were the Simurrum and the Lullubi tribal kingdoms. They were also often in conflict with Elam.

Military rulers of Mari

In the northern area of Mari, Semitic military rulers called the Shakkanakkus apparently continued to rule contemporaneously with the Third Dynasty of Ur, or possibly in the period just preceded it, with rulers such as military governors such as Puzur-Ishtar, who was probably contemporary with Amar-Sin.

Timeline of rulers

Assyriologists employ many complicated methods for establishing the most precise dates possible for this period, but controversy still exists. Generally, scholars use either the conventional (middle, generally preferred) or the low (short) chronologies. They are as follows:

Enthroned King Ur-Nammu, founder of the Third Dynasty of Ur c. 2047 BC, on a cylinder seal. His name appears vertically in the upper right corner (𒌨𒀭𒇉).

The Lament for Ur, commemorating the fall of Ur to the Elamites. Louvre Museum.

Ruler

Middle Chronology

All dates BC

(Utu-hengal)
 
 2119–2113

Ur-Nammu
 
 2112–c. 2095

Shulgi
 
 2094–2047

Amar-Sin

 2046–2038

Shu-Sin
 
 2037–2029

Ibbi-Sin
 
 2028–2004

The list of the Kings of the Third Dynasty of Ur with the length of their reigns, appears on a cuneiform document listing the kings of Ur and Isin, the "List of Reigns of Kings of Ur and Isin" (MS 1686). The list explains: " 18 years Ur-Namma (was) king, 48 years Shulgi (was) king, 9 years Amar-Suen, 9 years Su-Suen, 24 years Ibbi-Suen.

Abraham

Abraham, the common patriarch of the three Abrahamic religions, was probably born in Ur around that time, although estimated dates range from 2300 BC until 1960 BC, date of the destruction of Ur, and the identification of Ur with the Ur of the Chaldees in the Hebrew Bible is not entirely certain.

Fall of Ur III

See also: Lament for Ur

The power of the Neo-Sumerians was waning. Ibbi-Sin in the 21st century launched military campaigns into Elam, but did not manage to penetrate far into the country. In 2004/1940 BC (middle/short chronology respectively), the Elamites, allied with the people of Susa and led by Kindattu, king of the Elamite Shimashki dynasty, managed to sack Ur and lead Ibbi-Sin into captivity, ending the third dynasty of Ur. After this victory, the Elamites destroyed the kingdom, and ruled through military occupation for the next 21 years.

Mesopotamia then fell under Amorite influence. The Amorite kings of the Dynasty of Isin formed successor states to Ur III, starting the Isin-Larsa period. They managed to drive the Elamites out of Ur, rebuilt the city, and returned the statue of Nanna that the Elamites had plundered. The Amorites were nomadic tribes from the northern Levant who were Northwest Semitic speakers, unlike the native Akkadians of southern Mesopotamia and Assyria, who spoke East Semitic. By around the 19th century BC, much of southern Mesopotamia was occupied by the Amorites. The Amorites at first did not practice agriculture like more advanced Mesopotamians, preferring a semi-nomadic lifestyle, herding sheep. Over time, Amorite grain merchants rose to prominence and established their own independent dynasties in several south Mesopotamian city-states, most notably Isin, Larsa, Eshnunna, Lagash, and later, founding Babylon as a state.

Dating systems

The Ziggurat of Ur, rebuilt and enlarged many times, was founded by the Third Dynasty of Ur

When Kings of the Third Ur dynasty ruled they had specific dates and names for each period of their rule. One example was "the year of Ur-nammu king" which marked the time that Ur-Nammu proclaimed and told of his independence from Utu-Hegal of Uruk. Ur-Nammu controlled a small area on the Euphrates that was surrounding Ur. Another important time was the named the year "The threshed grain of Largas" This year name tells us of the time that Ur-Nammu attacked the territory of Largas. One consequence of this attack was that the Ur-Nammu's forces took grain back to Ur. Another year-name that has been discovered was the year that Ur-Nammu's daughter became en of the god Nanna and was renamed with the priestess-name of En-Nirgal-ana. As of today the designation of en of Nanna makes this year's designation almost certain.

Social and political organization

Political organization

Cylinder seal of King Shulgi, Louvre Museum.

The land ruled by the Ur III kings was divided up into provinces that were each run by a governor (called an ensí). In certain tumultuous regions, military commanders assumed more power in governing.

Each province contained a redistribution center where provincial taxes, called bala, would all go to be shipped to the capital. Taxes could be payable in various forms, from crops to livestock to land. The government would then apportion out goods as needed, including giving food rations to the needy and funding temples.

The city of Nippur and its importance

The city of Nippur was one of the most important cities in the Third Dynasty of Ur. Nippur is believed to be the religious center of Mesopotamia. It was home to the shrine of Enlil, who was the lord of all gods. This was where the God Enlil spoke the king's name and was calling the king to his existence. This was used as a legitimacy for every king in order to secure power. The city is also believed to be a place where people would often take disputes according to some tablets that were found near the city. Politically it is hard to say how significant Nippur was because the city had no status as a dynastic or military power. However, the fact that Nippur never really gave kings any real political or military advantages suggests to some that it was never really conquered. The city itself was more viewed as "national Cult Center." Because it was viewed this way it was thought that any conquest of the city would give the Mesopotamian rulers unacceptable political risks. Also as the city was seen as a holy site this enabled Nippur to survive numerous conflicts that wiped out many other cities in the region.

Social system

An architectural foundation-nail figurine depicting king Amar-Sin himself carrying the builder's wicker traybasket. His name translates to 'immortal moon-god'.

This is an area where scholars have many different views. It had long been posited that the common laborer was nothing more than a serf, but new analysis and documents reveal a possible different picture. Gangs of laborers can be divided into various groups.

Certain groups indeed seem to work under compulsion. Others work in order to keep property or get rations from the state. Still other laborers were free men and women for whom social mobility was a possibility. Many families travelled together in search of labor. Such laborers could amass private property and even be promoted to higher positions. This is quite a different picture of a laborer's life than the previous belief that they were afforded no way to move out of the social group they were born into.

Slaves also made up a crucial group of labor for the state. One scholar estimates that 2/5 of chattel slaves mentioned in documents were not born slaves but became slaves due to accumulating debt, being sold by family members, or other reasons. However, one surprising feature of this period is that slaves seem to have been able to accumulate some assets and even property during their lifetimes such that they could buy their freedom. Extant documents give details about specific deals for slaves' freedoms negotiated with slaveowners.

An early code of law

Akshak

Babylon

Der

Eridu

Isin

Kish

Lagash

Larak

Larsa

Mari

Nippur

Shuruppak

Sippar

Tuttul

Umma

Ur

Uruk

Map of Iraq showing important sites that were occupied by the Third Dynasty of Ur (clickable map)

One salient feature of Ur III is its establishment of one of the earliest known law-codes, the Code of Ur-Nammu. It is quite similar to the famous Code of Hammurabi, resembling its prologue and bodily structure. Extant copies, written in Old Babylonian, exist from Nippur, Sippar, and also Ur itself. Although the prologue credits Ur-Nammu, the author is still somewhat under dispute; some scholars attribute it to his son, Shulgi.

The prologue to the law-code, written in the first person, established the king as the beacon of justice for his land, a role that previous kings normally did not play. He claims to want justice for all, including traditionally unfortunate groups in the kingdom like the widower or the orphan.

Most legal disputes were dealt with locally by government officials called mayors, although their decision could be appealed and eventually overturned by the provincial governor. Sometimes legal disputes were publicly aired with witnesses present at a place like the town square or in front of the temple. However, the image of the king as the supreme judge of the land took hold, and this image appears in many literary works and poems. Citizens sometimes wrote letters of prayer to the king, either present or past.

Industry and commerce

Cylinder seal of King Ur-Nammu.

Plan of a real estate of the city of Umma, with indications of the surfaces of the parts. Third Dynasty of Ur, Louvre.

The Ur III kings oversaw many substantial state-run projects, including intricate irrigation systems and centralization of agriculture. An enormous labor force was amassed to work in agriculture, particularly in irrigation, harvesting, and sowing.

Textiles were a particularly important industry in Ur during this time. The textile industry was run by the state. Many men, women, and children alike were employed to produce wool and linen clothing. The detailed documents from the administration of this period exhibit a startling amount of centralization; some scholars have gone so far as to say no other period in Mesopotamian history reached the same level.

Trade With the Gulf Region

Trade was very important to the Ur Dynasty because it was a way to ensure that the empire had enough ways to grow its wealth and care for those Ur ruled. One of the areas that Mesopotamia traded with was the Persian Gulf area. With the Gulf trade some of the most important things that were traded a lot were raw materials like metal, wood, ivory, and also semi-precious stones. One specific kind of item traded with the two regions were conch shells. These were made by craftsmen who would turn them into lamps and cups dating back to the 3rd millennium. They have been discovered in graves, palaces, temples, and even residential homes. The fact that this item was mostly found in upper class contexts could show that only the wealthy at the time had access to the item. Additionally, Ur consumed jewelry, inlays, carvings, and cylinder seals in significant amounts. The high demand for these items shows a heavy trade relationship with the Gulf region.

Commercial relations with the Indus

The trade routes between Mesopotamia and the Indus

Main article: Indus-Mesopotamia relations

Evidence for imports from the Indus to Ur can be found from around 2350 BC. Various objects made with shell species that are characteristic of the Indus coast, particularly Trubinella Pyrum and Fasciolaria Trapezium, have been found in the archaeological sites of Mesopotamia dating from around 2500-2000 BC. Several Indus seals with Harappan script have also been found in Mesopotamia, particularly in Ur and Babylon. About twenty seals have been found from the Akkadian and Ur III sites, that have connections with Harappa and often use the Indus script.

These exchanges came to a halt with the extinction of the Indus valley civilization after around 1900 BC.

Art and culture

Main article: Neo-Sumerian art

The last king of the Ur III dynasty King Ibbi-Sin (c.2028–2004 BC) enthroned, with standing goddess.

Sumerian dominated the cultural sphere and was the language of legal, administrative, and economic documents, while signs of the spread of Akkadian could be seen elsewhere. New towns that arose in this period were virtually all given Akkadian names. Culture also thrived through many different types of art forms.

Literature

Sumerian texts were mass-produced in the Ur III period; however, the word 'revival' to describe this period is misleading because archaeological evidence does not offer evidence of a previous period of decline. Instead, Sumerian began to take on a different form. As the Semitic Akkadian language became the common spoken language, Sumerian continued to dominate literature and also administrative documents. Government officials learned to write at special schools that used only Sumerian literature.

Some scholars believe that the Uruk Epic of Gilgamesh was written down during this period into its classic Sumerian form. The Ur III Dynasty attempted to establish ties to the early kings of Uruk by claiming to be their familial relations.

For example, the Ur III kings often claimed Gilgamesh's divine parents, Ninsun and Lugalbanda, as their own, probably to evoke a comparison to the epic hero.

Another text from this period, known as "The Death of Urnammu", contains an underworld scene in which Ur-Nammu showers "his brother Gilgamesh" with gifts.

\t\t
\t\t\t

\t\t\t
Cuneiform tablet impressed with cylinder seal. Receipt of goats, c. 2040 BC, year 7 of Amar-Sin. Neo-Summerian.

\t\t\t

\t\t

\t\t
\t\t\t

\t\t\t
Cuneiform tablet impressed with cylinder seal. Receipt of goats, c. 2040 BC. Neo-Summerian (drawing).

\t\t\t

\t\t

\t\t
\t\t\t

\t\t\t
Administrative Tablet, Third Dynasty of Ur, 2026 BC.

\t\t\t

\t\t

See also

List of Mesopotamian dynasties

Further reading

Frayne, Douglas (1997). Ur III Period (2112-2004 BC). University of Toronto Press. ISBN 9781442623767 – via ProQuest Ebook Central.

Robertson, John F. (1984). "The Internal Political and Economic Structure of Old Babylonian Nippur: The Guennakkum and His 'House'". Journal of Cuneiform Studies. 36 (2): 145–190. doi:10.2307/1360054. JSTOR 1360054.

Sallaberger, Walther; Westenholz, Aage (1999). Mesopotamien. Akkade-Zeit und Ur III-Zeit. Orbis Biblicus et Orientalis. 160/3. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. ISBN 3-525-53325-X.

Van de Mieroop, Marc (2007). A History of the Ancient Near East, ca. 3000–323 BC. Second Edition. Blackwell History of the Ancient World. Malden: Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-4051-4911-2.

External links

The State of Ur III Research

References

^ "The so-called Second Dynasty of Ur is a phantom and is not recorded in the SKL" in Frayne, Douglas (2008). Pre-Sargonic Period: Early Periods, Volume 1 (2700-2350 BC). University of Toronto Press. p. 910. ISBN 978-1-4426-9047-9.

^ Encyclopedia Iranica: Elam - Simashki dynasty, F. Vallat

^ a b Lafont, Bertrand. "The Army of the Kings of Ur: The Textual Evidence". Cuneiform Digital Library Journal.

^ Eidem, Jesper (2001). The Shemshāra Archives 1: The Letters. Kgl. Danske Videnskabernes Selskab. p. 24. ISBN 9788778762450.

^ Frayne, Douglas (1990). Old Babylonian Period (2003-1595 BCE). University of Toronto Press. pp. 707 ff. ISBN 9780802058737.

^ Thomas, Ariane; Potts, Timothy (2020). Mesopotamia: Civilization Begins. Getty Publications. p. 14. ISBN 978-1-60606-649-2.

^ Leick, Gwendolyn (2002). Who's Who in the Ancient Near East. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-134-78796-8.

^ Durand, M.L. (2008). Supplément au Dictionnaire de la Bible: TELL HARIRI/MARI: TEXTES (PDF). p. 227.

^ a b "Hash-hamer Cylinder seal of Ur-Nammu". British Museum.

^ Barton, George A. (George Aaron) (1918). Miscellaneous Babylonian inscriptions. New Haven, Yale University Press. pp. 45–50.

^ George, A. R. Sumero-Babylonian King Lists and Date Lists (PDF). pp. 206–210.

^ Nagell, Edward (2006). Destiny: Volume Two: God, Creation, and Religion, God's Actions and Mankind's Reactions. Infinity Publishing. ISBN 9780741433701.

^ Bryce, Trevor (2009). The Routledge Handbook of the Peoples and Places of Ancient Western Asia: The Near East from the Early Bronze Age to the fall of the Persian Empire. Routledge. p. 221. ISBN 9781134159079.

^ D. T. Potts (12 November 2015). The Archaeology of Elam: Formation and Transformation of an Ancient Iranian State. Cambridge University Press. p. 133. ISBN 978-1-107-09469-7.

^ Frayne, Douglas (1997). Ur III Period (2112-2004 BC). Canadian Electronic Library.

^ Fish, T. (1938). "The Sumerian City Nippur in the Period of the Third Dynasty of Ur". Iraq. 5: 157–179. doi:10.2307/4241631. JSTOR 4241631.

^ John Bagnell Bury; et al. (1925). The Cambridge Ancient History. Cambridge University Press. p. 607. ISBN 0-521-07791-5.

^ Potts, D. T. (1999). The Archaeology of Elam. Cambridge University Press. p. 132. ISBN 9780521564960.

^ Edens, Cristopher. "Dynamics of Trade in the Ancient Mesopotamian "World System. American Anthropologist. New Series: 22.

^ Reade, Julian E. (2008). The Indus-Mesopotamia relationship reconsidered (Gs Elisabeth During Caspers). Archaeopress. pp. 14–17. ISBN 978-1-4073-0312-3.

^ Gensheimer, T. R. (1984). "The Role of shell in Mesopotamia : evidence for trade exchange with Oman and the Indus Valley". Paléorient. 10: 71–72. doi:10.3406/paleo.1984.4350.

^ "Indus stamp-seal found in Ur BM 122187". British Museum.

"Indus stamp-seal discovered in Ur BM 123208". British Museum.

"Indus stamp-seal discovered in Ur BM 120228". British Museum.

^ Gadd, G. J. (1958). Seals of Ancient Indian style found at Ur.

^ Podany, Amanda H. (2012). Brotherhood of Kings: How International Relations Shaped the Ancient Near East. Oxford University Press. p. 49. ISBN 978-0-19-971829-0.

^ Joan Aruz; Ronald Wallenfels (2003). Art of the First Cities: The Third Millennium B.C. from the Mediterranean to the Indus. p. 246. ISBN 978-1-58839-043-1. Square-shaped Indus seals of fired steatite have been found at a few sites in Mesopotamia.

^ McIntosh, Jane (2008). The Ancient Indus Valley: New Perspectives. ABC-CLIO. pp. 182–190. ISBN 9781576079072.

^ Stiebing, William H. (2016). Ancient Near Eastern History and Culture. Routledge. p. 85. ISBN 9781315511160.

^ "Seated figure approached by a goddess leading a worshiper". www.metmuseum.org.

^ a b Spar, Ira (1988). Cuneiform Texts in The Metropolitan Museum of Art Volume I Tablets Cones and Bricks of the Third Ur Dynasty (PDF). The Metropolitan Museum of Art. p. 38, Nb 35.

Ancient Syria and Mesopotamia

 Syria
 Northern Mesopotamia
 Southern Mesopotamia

c. 3500–2350 BCE
 Semitic nomads
 Sumerian city-states

c. 2350–2200 BCE
 Akkadian Empire

c. 2200–2100 BCE
 Gutians

c. 2100–2000 BCE
 Third Dynasty of Ur (Sumerian Renaissance)

c. 2000–1800 BCE
 Mari and other Amorite city-states
 Old Assyrian Empire (Northern Akkadians)
 Isin/Larsa and other Amorite city-states

c. 1800–1600 BCE
 Old Hittite Kingdom
 Old Babylonian Empire (Southern Akkadians)

c. 1600–1400 BCE
 Mitanni (Hurrians)
 Karduniaš (Kassites)

c. 1400–1200 BCE
 Middle Hittite Kingdom
 
 Middle Assyria

c. 1200–1150 BCE
 Bronze Age Collapse ("Sea Peoples")
 Arameans

c. 1150–911 BCE
 Phoenicia
 Neo-Hittite

city-states
 Aram-

Damascus
 Arameans
 Middle Babylonia
 Chal-

de-

ans

911–729 BCE
 Neo-Assyrian Empire

729–609 BCE
 
626–539 BCE
 Neo-Babylonian Empire (Chaldeans)

539–331 BCE
 Achaemenid Empire

336–301 BCE
 Macedonian Empire (Ancient Greeks and Macedonians)

311–129 BCE
 Seleucid Empire

129–63 BCE
 Seleucid Empire
 Parthian Empire

63 BCE–243 CE
 Roman Empire/Byzantine Empire (Syria)

243–636 CE
 Sassanid Empire

v

t

e

Ancient Mesopotamia

Geography

Modern 
Euphrates

Upper Mesopotamia

Mesopotamian Marshes

Persian Gulf

Syrian Desert

Taurus Mountains

Tigris

Zagros Mountains

Ancient 
Akkad

Assyria

Babylonia

Chaldea

Elam

Hittites

Media

Mitanni

Sumer

Urartu

Cities

History

Pre- / Protohistory 
Acheulean

Mousterian

Trialetian

Zarzian

Natufian

Nemrikian

Khiamian

Pre-Pottery Neolithic A (PPNA)

Pre-Pottery Neolithic B (PPNB)

Hassuna/Samarra

Halaf

Ubaid

Uruk

Jemdet Nasr

Kish civilization

History 
Early Dynastic

Akkadian

Gutians

Simurrum

Ur III

Isin-Larsa

Old Babylonian

Kassite

Neo-Assyrian

Neo-Babylonian

Achaemenid

Seleucid

Parthian

Roman

Sasanian

Muslim conquest

Timeline of the Assyrian Empire

Hakkari

Languages 
Akkadian

Amorite

Aramaic

Eblaite

Elamite

Gutian

Hittite

Hurrian

Luwian

Middle Persian

Old Persian

Parthian

Proto-Armenian

Sumerian

Urartian

Culture / Society 
Architecture

Art

Cuneiform

Akkadian literature

Sumerian literature

Music

Religion

Indus-Mesopotamia relations

Egypt-Mesopotamia relations

Royal titles

Archaeology 
Looting

Destruction by ISIL

Tell

v

t

e

Rulers of the Ancient Near East

Territories/

dates

EgyptCanaanEblaMariAkshak/

AkkadKishUrukAdabUmma

LagashUrElam

 Preceded by: Chronology of the Neolithic period

4000–3200 BCE
 Naqada culture (4000–3100 BCE)
 Proto-Cannaanites
 Sumerian period (4000–2340 BCE)

Pre-Dynastic period (4000–2900 BCE)

Naqada I

Naqada II

 Canaanites

Uruk period

(4000-3100 BCE)

(Anonymous "King-priests")

Legendary ante-deluvian rulers:

In Eridu: Alulim, Alalngar, then in Bad-tibira: En-men-lu-ana, En-men-gal-ana, Dumuzid, the Shepherd, then in Larag: En-sipad-zid-ana, then in Zimbir: En-men-dur-ana, then in Shuruppag: Ubara-Tutu

"then the flood swept over"

3200–3100 BCE
 Proto-Dynastic period

(Naqada III)

Early or legendary kings:

Upper Egypt

Finger Snail Fish Pen-Abu Animal Stork Canide Bull Scorpion I Shendjw Iry-Hor Ka Scorpion II Narmer / Menes
 Lower Egypt

Hedju Hor Ny-Hor Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Nat-Hor Mekh Double Falcon Wash

3100–2900 BCE
 Early Dynastic Period

First Dynasty of Egypt

Narmer Menes Hor-Aha Djer Djet Merneith♀ Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qa'a Sneferka Horus Bird
 Jemdet Nasr period

Great Flood

2900 BCE
 Second Dynasty of Egypt

Hotepsekhemwy Nebra/Raneb Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa Weneg-Nebty Wadjenes Senedj Seth-Peribsen Sekhemib-Perenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy

 Early Dynastic Period I (2900–2700 BCE)

First Eblaite

Kingdom

(Semitic)
 First kingdom

of Mari
 Kish I dynasty

Jushur, Kullassina-bel

Nangishlishma,

En-tarah-ana

Babum, Puannum, Kalibum
 
2800 BCE

 Kalumum Zuqaqip Atab

Mashda Arwium Etana

Balih En-me-nuna

Melem-Kish Barsal-nuna
 Uruk I dynasty

Mesh-ki-ang-gasher
 
Enmerkar ("conqueror of Aratta")

2700 BCE
 Early Dynastic Period II (2700–2600 BCE)

 Zamug, Tizqar, Ilku

Iltasadum
 Lugalbanda

Dumuzid, the Fisherman
 
En-me-barage-si ("made the land of Elam submit")

Aga of Kish
 Gilgamesh
 
2600 BCE
 Third Dynasty of Egypt

Djoser Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Qahedjet Huni

 Early Dynastic Period III (2600–2340 BCE)

Sagisu

Abur-lim

Agur-lim

Ibbi-Damu

Baba-Damu
 
 Kish II dynasty

(5 kings)

Uhub

Mesilim
 Ur-Nungal

Udulkalama

Labashum
 
 Lagash

En-hegal

Lugalshaengur
 Ur

A-Imdugud

Ur-Pabilsag

Meskalamdug

(Queen Puabi)

Akalamdug
 
Enun-dara-anna

Mes-he

Melamanna

Lugal-kitun
 Adab

Nin-kisalsi

Me-durba

Lugal-dalu

2575 BCE
 Old Kingdom of Egypt

Fourth Dynasty of Egypt

Snefru Khufu

Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis
 Ur I dynasty

Mesannepada

"King of Ur and Kish", victorious over Uruk
 
2500 BCE
 Phoenicia (2500-539 BCE)
 Second kingdom

of Mari

(Semitic)

Ikun-Shamash

Iku-Shamagan

Ansud

Sa'umu

Ishtup-Ishar

Ikun-Mari

Iblul-Il

Nizi
 Akshak dynasty

Unzi

Undalulu
 Kish III dynasty

Ku-Baba
 Uruk II dynasty

Enshakushanna
 Mug-si
 Umma I dynasty

Pabilgagaltuku
 Lagash I dynasty

Ur-Nanshe

Akurgal
 A'annepada

Meskiagnun

Elulu

Balulu
 Awan dynasty

Peli

Tata

Ukkutahesh

Hishur

2450 BCE
 Fifth Dynasty of Egypt

Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas
 Enar-Damu

Ishar-Malik
 Ush

Enakalle

Elamite invasions

(3 kings)
 Shushuntarana

Napilhush

2425 BCE
 Kun-Damu
 Eannatum

(King of Lagash, Sumer, Akkad, conqueror of Elam)

2400 BCE
 Adub-Damu

Igrish-Halam

Irkab-Damu
 Urur
 Kish IV dynasty

Puzur-Suen

Ur-Zababa
 Lugal-kinishe-dudu

Lugal-kisalsi
 E-iginimpa'e

Meskigal
 Ur-Lumma

Il

Gishakidu

(Queen Bara-irnun)
 Enannatum

Entemena

Enannatum II

Enentarzi
 Ur II dynasty

Nanni

Mesh-ki-ang-Nanna II
 Kiku-siwe-tempti

2380 BCE
 Sixth Dynasty of Egypt

Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah

 Adab dynasty

Lugalannemundu

"King of the four quarters of the world"

2370 BCE
 Isar-Damu
 Enna-Dagan

Ikun-Ishar

Ishqi-Mari
 Invasion of Mari

Anbu, Anba, Bazi, Zizi of Mari, Limer, Sharrum-iter
 Ukush
 Lugalanda

Urukagina
 Luh-ishan

2350 BCE

 Puzur-Nirah

Ishu-Il

Shu-Sin
 Uruk III dynasty

Lugalzagesi

(Governor of Umma, King of all Sumer)

2340 BCE
 
 Akkadian Period (2340–2150 BCE)

Akkadian Empire

(Semitic)

Sargon of Akkad Rimush Manishtushu
 Akkadian Governors:

Eshpum

Ilshu-rabi

Epirmupi

Ili-ishmani

2250 BCE
 Naram-Sin
 Lugal-ushumgal

(vassal of the Akkadians)

2200 BCE
 First Intermediate Period

Seventh Dynasty of Egypt

Eighth Dynasty of Egypt
 Second Eblaite

Kingdom

(Semitic)

(Vassals of UR III)
 Shakkanakku

dynasty

(Semitic)

Ididish

Shu-Dagan

Ishma-Dagan

(Vassals of the Akkadians)

Shar-Kali-Sharri

Igigi, Imi, Nanum, Ilulu (3 years)

Dudu

Shu-turul
 Uruk IV dynasty

Ur-nigin

Ur-gigir
 
 Lagash II dynasty

Puzer-Mama

Ur-Ningirsu I

Pirig-me

Lu-Baba

Lu-gula

Ka-ku

 Hishep-Ratep

Helu

Khita

Puzur-Inshushinak

2150 BCE
 Ninth Dynasty of Egypt

Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut
 Neo-Sumerian Period (2150–2000 BCE)

Nûr-Mêr

Ishtup-Ilum

Ishgum-Addu

Apil-kin
 Gutian dynasty

(21 kings)

La-erabum

Si'um
 Kuda (Uruk)

Puzur-ili

Ur-Utu
 
 Umma II dynasty

Lugalannatum

(vassal of the Gutians)
 Ur-Baba

Gudea

Ur-Ningirsu

Ur-gar

Nam-mahani

Tirigan

2125 BCE
 Tenth Dynasty of Egypt

Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merykare
 Iddi-ilum

Ili-Ishar

Tura-Dagan

Puzur-Ishtar

Hitial-Erra

Hanun-Dagan

(Vassals of Ur III)
 Uruk V dynasty

Utu-hengal

2100 BCE

 Ur III dynasty

"Kings of Ur, Sumer and Akkad"

Ur-Nammu Shulgi Amar-Sin Shu-Sin Ibbi-Sin

2050 BCE

2000 BCE
 Middle Kingdom of Egypt

Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt

Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV

circa 2000 BCE
 Amorite invasions
 Elamite invasions

Kindattu (Shimashki Dynasty)

2025-1763 BCE
 Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt

Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu♀
 Third Eblaite

Kingdom

(Semitic)

Ibbit-Lim Immeya Indilimma
 Old Assyrian Empire

(2025–1378 BCE)

Puzur-Ashur I Shalim-ahum Ilu-shuma Erishum I Ikunum Sargon I Puzur-Ashur II Naram-Sin Erishum II Shamshi-Adad I Ishme-Dagan I Mut-Ashkur Rimush Asinum Ashur-dugul Ashur-apla-idi Nasir-Sin Sin-namir Ipqi-Ishtar Adad-salulu Adasi Bel-bani Libaya Sharma-Adad I Iptar-Sin Bazaya Lullaya Shu-Ninua Sharma-Adad II Erishum III Shamshi-Adad II Ishme-Dagan II Shamshi-Adad III Ashur-nirari I Puzur-Ashur III Enlil-nasir I Nur-ili Ashur-shaduni Ashur-rabi I Ashur-nadin-ahhe I Enlil-Nasir II Ashur-nirari II Ashur-bel-nisheshu Ashur-rim-nisheshu Ashur-nadin-ahhe II
 Isin-Larsa period (Amorites)

Dynasty of Isin: Ishbi-Erra Shu-Ilishu Iddin-Dagan Ishme-Dagan Lipit-Eshtar Ur-Ninurta Bur-Suen Lipit-Enlil Erra-imitti Enlil-bani Zambiya Iter-pisha Ur-du-kuga Suen-magir Damiq-ilishu

Dynasty of Larsa: Naplanum Emisum Samium Zabaia Gungunum Abisare Sumuel Nur-Adad Sin-Iddinam Sin-Eribam Sin-Iqisham Silli-Adad Warad-Sin Rim-Sin I (...) Rim-Sin II
 Sukkalmah dynasty

Siwe-Palar-Khuppak

1894–1595 BCE
 Second Intermediate Period

Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt

Fourteenth Dynasty of Egypt
 Abraham

(Biblical)
 Yamhad

First Babylonian dynasty

("Old Babylonian Period")

(Amorites)

Sumu-abum Sumu-la-El Sin-muballitSabium Apil-Sin Sin-muballit Hammurabi Samsu-iluna Abi-eshuh Ammi-ditana Ammi-saduqa Samsu-Ditana

Early Kassite rulers

Second Babylonian dynasty

("Sealand Dynasty")

Ilum-ma-ili Itti-ili-nibi Damqi-ilishu

Ishkibal Shushushi Gulkishar

mDIŠ+U-EN Peshgaldaramesh Ayadaragalama

Akurduana Melamkurkurra Ea-gamil

Sixteenth

Dynasty

Abydos

Dynasty

Seventeenth

Dynasty

 Fifteenth Dynasty of Egypt

("Hyksos")

Semqen 'Aper-'Anati Sakir-Har Khyan Apepi Khamudi
 Mitanni

(1600–1260 BCE)

Kirta Shuttarna I Parshatatar

1531–1155 BCE

New Kingdom of Egypt

Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt

Ahmose I Amenhotep I

Third Babylonian dynasty (Kassites)

Agum-Kakrime Burnaburiash I Kashtiliash III Ulamburiash Agum III Karaindash Kadashman-harbe I Kurigalzu I Kadashman-Enlil I Burnaburiash II Kara-hardash Nazi-Bugash Kurigalzu II Nazi-Maruttash Kadashman-Turgu Kadashman-Enlil II Kudur-Enlil Shagarakti-Shuriash Kashtiliashu IV Enlil-nadin-shumi Kadashman-Harbe II Adad-shuma-iddina Adad-shuma-usur Meli-Shipak II Marduk-apla-iddina I Zababa-shuma-iddin Enlil-nadin-ahi
 Kidinuid dynasty

Igehalkid dynasty

Untash-Napirisha

Thutmose I Thutmose II Thutmose III

Hatshepsut♀ Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten♀ Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb

Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt

Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Twosret♀ 

 Hittite Empire

1155–1025 BCE
 Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt

Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI

Third Intermediate Period

Twenty-first Dynasty of Egypt

Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II 

 Phoenicia

Kingdom of Israel

Saul

Ish-bosheth

David

Solomon
 Syro-Hittite states
 Middle Assyrian Empire

Eriba-Adad I Ashur-uballit I Enlil-nirari Arik-den-ili Adad-nirari I Shalmaneser I Tukulti-Ninurta I Ashur-nadin-apli Ashur-nirari III Enlil-kudurri-usur Ninurta-apal-Ekur Ashur-dan I Ninurta-tukulti-Ashur Mutakkil-Nusku Ashur-resh-ishi I Tiglath-Pileser I Asharid-apal-Ekur Ashur-bel-kala Eriba-Adad II Shamshi-Adad IV Ashurnasirpal I Shalmaneser II Ashur-nirari IV Ashur-rabi II Ashur-resh-ishi II Tiglath-Pileser II Ashur-dan II
 Fourth Babylonian dynasty ("Second Dynasty of Isin")

Marduk-kabit-ahheshu Itti-Marduk-balatu Ninurta-nadin-shumi Nebuchadnezzar I Enlil-nadin-apli Marduk-nadin-ahhe Marduk-shapik-zeri Adad-apla-iddina Marduk-ahhe-eriba Marduk-zer-X Nabu-shum-libur
 Shutrukid dynasty

Shutruk-Nakhunte

1025–934 BCE
 Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, Eighth Babylonian dynasties ("Period of Chaos")

Simbar-shipak Ea-mukin-zeri Kashshu-nadin-ahi Eulmash-shakin-shumi Ninurta-kudurri-usur I Shirikti-shuqamuna Mar-biti-apla-usur Nabû-mukin-apli

911–745 BCE
 Twenty-second Dynasty of Egypt

Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV

Twenty-third Dynasty of Egypt

Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Menkheperre Ini

Twenty-fourth Dynasty of Egypt

Tefnakht Bakenranef 

 Kingdom of Samaria

Kingdom of Judah
 Neo-Assyrian Empire

Adad-nirari II Tukulti-Ninurta II Ashurnasirpal II Shalmaneser III Shamshi-Adad V Shammuramat (regent) Adad-nirari III Shalmaneser IV Ashur-Dan III Ashur-nirari V

Ninth Babylonian Dynasty

Ninurta-kudurri-usur II Mar-biti-ahhe-iddina Shamash-mudammiq Nabu-shuma-ukin I Nabu-apla-iddina Marduk-zakir-shumi I Marduk-balassu-iqbi Baba-aha-iddina (five kings) Ninurta-apla-X Marduk-bel-zeri Marduk-apla-usur Eriba-Marduk Nabu-shuma-ishkun Nabonassar Nabu-nadin-zeri Nabu-shuma-ukin II Nabu-mukin-zeri

 Humban-Tahrid dynasty

Teumman

745–609 BCE
 Twenty-fifth Dynasty of Egypt

("Black Pharaohs")

Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun
 Neo-Assyrian Empire

(Sargonid dynasty)

Tiglath-Pileser† Shalmaneser† Marduk-apla-iddina II Sargon† Sennacherib† Marduk-zakir-shumi II Marduk-apla-iddina II Bel-ibni Ashur-nadin-shumi† Nergal-ushezib Mushezib-Marduk Esarhaddon† Ashurbanipal Ashur-etil-ilani Sinsharishkun Sin-shumu-lishir Ashur-uballit II

Assyrian conquest of Egypt
 
626–539 BCE
 Twenty-sixth Dynasty of Egypt

Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III
 Neo-Babylonian Empire

Nabopolassar Nebuchadnezzar II Amel-Marduk Neriglissar Labashi-Marduk Nabonidus
 Median Empire

Deioces Phraortes Madius Cyaxares Astyages

539–331 BCE
 Twenty-seventh Dynasty of Egypt

(Achaemenid conquest of Egypt)

Achaemenid Empire

Cyrus Cambyses Darius I Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II Artaxerxes II Artaxerxes III Artaxerxes IV Darius III

Twenty-eighth Dynasty of Egypt

Twenty-ninth Dynasty of Egypt

Thirtieth Dynasty of Egypt

Thirty-first Dynasty of Egypt

331–141 BCE
 Ptolemaic dynasty

Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy Keraunos Ptolemy II Philadelphus Ptolemy III Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra (regent) Ptolemy VI Philometor Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Cleopatra II Philometor Soter Ptolemy VIII Physcon Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Lathyros Ptolemy X Alexander Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander Ptolemy XII Auletes Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Berenice IV Epiphanea Ptolemy XIII Ptolemy XIV Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion

Hellenistic Period

Argead dynasty: Alexander I Philip Alexander II Antigonus

Seleucid Empire: Seleucus I Antiochus I Antiochus II Seleucus II Seleucus III Antiochus III Seleucus IV Antiochus IV Antiochus V Demetrius I Alexander III Demetrius II Antiochus VI Dionysus Diodotus Tryphon Antiochus VII Sidetes

141–30 BCE
 Kingdom of Judea

Simon Thassi John Hyrcanus Aristobulus I Alexander Jannaeus Salome Alexandra Hyrcanus II Aristobulus II Antigonus II Mattathias
 Alexander II Zabinas Seleucus V Philometor Antiochus VIII Grypus Antiochus IX Cyzicenus Seleucus VI Epiphanes Antiochus X Eusebes Antiochus XI Epiphanes Demetrius III Eucaerus Philip I Philadelphus Antiochus XII Dionysus Antiochus XIII Asiaticus Philip II Philoromaeus
 Parthian Empire

Mithridates I Phraates Hyspaosines Artabanus Mithridates II Gotarzes Mithridates III Orodes I Sinatruces Phraates III Mithridates IV Orodes II Phraates IV Tiridates II Musa Phraates V Orodes III Vonones I Artabanus II Tiridates III Artabanus II Vardanes I Gotarzes II Meherdates Vonones II Vologases I Vardanes II Pacorus II Vologases II Artabanus III Osroes I

30 BCE–618 CE
 Roman Empire

(Roman conquest of Egypt)

Province of Egypt
 Roman Empire

Judea
 Roman Empire

Syria
 Roman Empire

Province of Mesopotamia
 Vologases III Parthamaspates Sinatruces II Mithridates V Vologases IV Osroes II Vologases V Vologases VI Artabanus IV

Sasanian Empire

Province of Asoristan

Ardashir I Shapur I Hormizd I Bahram I Bahram II Bahram III Narseh Hormizd II Adur Narseh Shapur II Ardashir II Shapur III Bahram IV Yazdegerd I Shapur IV Khosrow Bahram V Yazdegerd II Hormizd III Peroz I Balash Kavad I Jamasp Kavad I Khosrow I Hormizd IV Khosrow II Bahram VI Chobin Vistahm

618–628 CE
 Sasanian Empire

(Sasanian conquest of Egypt)

Province of Egypt

Shahrbaraz Sahralanyozan Shahrbaraz
 Sasanian Empire

Province of Asoristan

Khosrow II Kavad II Ardashir III Shahrbaraz Khosrow III Boran Shapur-i Shahrvaraz Azarmidokht Farrukh Hormizd Hormizd VI Khosrow IV Boran Yazdegerd III Peroz III Narsieh

628–641 CE
 Roman Empire

Province of Egypt
 Roman Empire

Judea
 Roman Empire

Syria
 Roman Empire

Province of Mesopotamia

639–651 CE
 Muslim conquest of Egypt
 Muslim conquest of the Levant
 Muslim conquest of Mesopotamia and Persia

^ W. Hallo; W. Simpson (1971). The Ancient Near East. New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich. pp. 48–49.

^ "Rulers of Mesopotamia". cdli.ox.ac.uk. University of Oxford, CNRS.

^ Thomas, Ariane; Potts, Timothy (2020). Mesopotamia: Civilization Begins. Getty Publications. p. 14. ISBN 978-1-60606-649-2.

^ Roux, Georges (1992). Ancient Iraq. Penguin Books Limited. pp. 532–534 (Chronological Tables). ISBN 978-0-14-193825-7.

^ "The Sumerian king list: translation". etcsl.orinst.ox.ac.uk. Archived from the original on 2008-05-08.

^ Per Sumerian King List

^ a b Per Sumerian King List

^ Unger, Merrill F. (2014). Israel and the Aramaeans of Damascus: A Study in Archaeological Illumination of Bible History. Wipf and Stock Publishers. p. 5. ISBN 978-1-62564-606-4.
